              applied
              sciences
Article
Predicting PM2.5, PM10, SO2, NO2, NO and CO Air Pollutant
Values with Linear Regression in R Language
Zoltan Kazi            , Snezana Filip        and Ljubica Kazi *


                                          Technical Faculty “Mihajlo Pupin”, University of Novi Sad, 23000 Zrenjanin, Serbia; zoltan.kazi@tfzr.rs (Z.K.);
                                          filipsnezana@gmail.com (S.F.)
                                          * Correspondence: ljubica.kazi@gmail.com


                                          Abstract: Air pollution is one of the most challenging and complex problems of our time. This
                                          research presents the prediction of air pollutant values based on using an R program with linear
                                          regression. The research sample consists of obtained values of air pollutants such as sulphur dioxide
                                          (SO2 ), particulate matter (PM10, PM2.5), carbon monoxide (CO), nitrite oxides (NO, NO2 , and NOX ),
                                          atmospheric data pressure (p), temperature (T), and relative humidity (rh). The research data were
                                          collected from the city of Belgrade air quality monitoring reports, published by the Environmental
                                          Protection Agency of the Republic of Serbia. The report data were transformed into a form suitable
                                          for processing by the R program and used to derive prediction functions based on linear regression
                                          upon pairs of air pollutants. In this paper, we describe the R program that was created to enable
                                          the correlation of air pollutants with linear regression, which results in functions that are used
                                          for the prediction of pollutant values. The correlation of pollutants is presented graphically with
                                          diagrams created within the R GUI environment. The predicted data were categorized according to
                                          air pollution standard ranges. It has been shown that the derived functions from linear regression
                                          enable predictions that are well correlated with the data obtained by automatic acquisition from air
                                          quality monitoring stations. The R program was created by using R language statements without
                                          any additional packages, and, therefore, it is suitable for multiple uses in a diversity of application
                                          domains with minor adjustments to appropriate data sets.

Citation: Kazi, Z.; Filip, S.; Kazi, L.   Keywords: R language; programming; air pollution; prediction model; linear regression
Predicting PM2.5, PM10, SO2 , NO2 ,
NO and CO Air Pollutant Values
with Linear Regression in R
Language. Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 3617.
                                          1. Introduction
https://doi.org/10.3390/
app13063617
                                                 Emissions of dangerous gases into the atmosphere due to accidents, human activities,
                                          natural disasters, or other reasons are great threats to the human population, nature, and
Academic Editors: Somandla Ncube          infrastructure. Air pollution is one of the significant environmental problems that can cause
and Precious Mahlambi
                                          adverse health effects, such as asthma, allergies, infections [1], cancer [2], and the risk of
Received: 18 February 2023                low birth weight [3]. These health-related issues are correlated with air pollution, particu-
Revised: 8 March 2023                     larly in traffic [4,5]. Therefore, air pollutants data acquisition, measurements, monitoring,
Accepted: 10 March 2023                   evaluation model formulation [6], assessment [7], benchmarking [8], and forecasting [7,9]
Published: 12 March 2023                  became increasingly important, particularly in the circumstances of pandemics [10]. Many
                                          efforts have been made in the development of appropriate air pollution-related methods
                                          and tools, as well as their integration [11].
                                                 Data science software tools and modern programming languages enable working with
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
                                          large amounts of data related to environmental problems by utilizing specific functions and
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                          commands for data analysis, advanced reasoning, and visualization [12], with languages
This article is an open access article
                                          such as Python [13] and R [14]. R was developed as a computational environment to
distributed under the terms and
                                          enable statistical data analysis by Ross Ihaka and Robert Gentleman from the University
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
                                          of Auckland, New Zealand [15]. R is a free and open-source programming language and
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
                                          software environment. The development and maintenance are assigned to the R Core Team,
4.0/).                                    i.e., the R Foundation for Statistical Computing [16]. One of the most important features of




Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 3617. https://doi.org/10.3390/app13063617                                                  https://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci
Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 3617                                                                                                  2 of 16




                            R is its flexibility and scalability, i.e., the possibility to add a set of new functionalities to the
                            base system. This is supported by tools for the development of additional packages [17],
                            so, in this way, R could be used in a diverse set of applications, such as ecology [18].
                                  The air pollution data analysis and the use of R in ecology were in focus in multiple
                            previous research results [18–25]. However, the literature review of related work shows the
                            research gap, which provides the basis for this research. Other related work has focused
                            on particular air pollutants and their predictions [9,24,26–34], while this paper provides
                            predictions for a variety of air pollutants. Other papers have used linear regression in
                            air pollution prediction but not with R language [28,32–39]. In previously published
                            papers, R was used for air pollution data analysis, but with other methods not with linear
                            regression [23–25,40].
                                  The aim of this research is related to using R for air pollution data correlation and
                            prediction. R language statements are used for creating the program that performs data
                            pre-processing with linear regression and establishes the mathematical model for the
                            relationship between two variables. In this research, the dependent and independent
                            variables are selected among air pollutant values for PM2.5, PM10, NO, NO2 , NOX , CO, and
                            SO2 , as well as meteorological parameters–pressure, temperature, and relative humidity.
                            The obtained mathematical models are used for air pollution data prediction. Results
                            of this study include: (1) a detailed presentation of the developed R program for linear
                            regression and prediction of air pollution data; (2) results of correlation of particular air
                            pollutants, particularly presented with linear regression diagrams; (3) results of linear
                            fitting, i.e., statistical evaluation of linear functions preciseness; and (4) prediction results
                            based on previously obtained and evaluated mathematical functions that correlate air
                            pollutant values.

                            2. Related Work
                                 The linear regression method has been applied to air pollution prediction within
                            multiple research results. Syafei et al. present an application of a linear regression model
                            regarding air pollutants (nitrogen dioxide, NO2 , particulate matter, PM10, and ozone, O3 ),
                            as well as data related to meteorological and temporal factors [26]. These data were used to
                            establish correlation between independent and dependent variables via the use of inde-
                            pendent component analysis and principal component analysis. Input data to formulate
                            the linear correlation function were obtained from monitoring stations in Indonesia for
                            the period March–April 2002. It has been concluded that monitoring stations, used for
                            data acquisition, provided data that resulted in different predictions due to meteorological
                            factors (particularly wind) and pollutants interactions.
                                 Before creating a prediction model, it is necessary to select predictors, i.e., air and
                            other components and factors, to be used in the formation of linear regression functions,
                            which, in turn, are used in prediction. In order to provide better air quality assessments,
                            Olvera-García et al. propose a new air quality evaluation model where environmental
                            parameters (PM2.5, PM10, O3 , CO, NO2 , SO2 ) were evaluated with the application of fuzzy
                            reasoning to compute and assign individual weights according to the pollutant importance
                            on the air evaluation [6]. This model considers five air pollution score stages: excellent,
                            good, regular, bad, and dangerous, based on data from the Mexico City Atmospheric
                            Monitoring System. With the pollutant weights in place, a better evaluation model is
                            proposed for the air quality assessments. Sethi and Mittal present the application of feature
                            selection methods (based on Least Absolute Selection and Shrinkage Operator with the
                            use of various machine learning techniques) in order to determine potentially significant
                            predictors [27]. Conclusions were drawn based on exploratory data analysis in Delhi, India,
                            and surrounding cities. It has been concluded that carbon monoxide, sulphur dioxide,
                            nitrogen dioxide, and ozone are the most important factors affecting the air quality index.
                                 Diverse solutions enable data acquisition and collection in research related to air pollu-
                            tion prediction via the Internet of Things (IoT), cloud computing, big data, and Geographic
                            Information Systems (GIS). Iskandaryan et al. present smart city data collection through
Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 3617                                                                                            3 of 16




                            the utilization of IoT system sensors, where air quality prediction is conducted with the
                            use of machine learning technologies [41]. The Google Earth Engine (GEE) cloud comput-
                            ing platform was used to obtain CO, NO2 , SO2, and aerosol optical depth (AOD) data in
                            Shandong Province, China, during the 2018–2020 period [10]. Zheng et al. describe the
                            air quality forecasting system based on monitoring stations located at large distances [28].
                            They collect a large quantity of meteorological and air quality data, and Microsoft’s cloud
                            platform Azure is used to integrate the obtained data. Geographic information systems
                            were used as data sources in air quality prediction within the research of Briggs et al. [42]
                            and Hochadel et al. [43].
                                  The development of methods and tools for air pollution prediction has emerged as
                            a significant domain in recent years, with research and professional results related to
                            applied artificial intelligence, data mining, fuzzy systems, machine learning, and neural
                            networks. Siwek and Osowski analyzed methods of data mining for the prediction of air
                            pollution [29]. In their research, they selected data from atmospheric pollutants PM10,
                            SO2 , NO2, and O3 and performed prediction by integrating different methods, such as a
                            genetic algorithm, the linear method of stepwise fit, decision trees, and neural networks.
                            Rajat et al. propose a system for forecasting the air pollution index by utilizing a supervised
                            machine learning approach [9]. This approach is applied to examine possibilities of having
                            the best forecasting precision by contrasting four different supervised machine learning
                            algorithms (decision tree, random forest tree, Naïve Bayes theorem, and K-nearest neighbor)
                            for prediction calculations. Data sets from all Indian states were collected and used as
                            the research sample. The trained extreme learning machine has been applied to eight air
                            quality parameters, obtained from two Hong Kong monitoring stations over a six-year
                            period [30]. This approach enabled the prediction of the concentration of air pollutants
                            at an extremely fast learning speed and resulted in an appropriate level of prediction
                            accuracy. The work of Ibarra-Berastegi et al. implements air pollution prediction based on
                            the creation and application of neural networks [31]. The obtained data for model creation
                            have been collected on an hourly basis for five air pollutants (SO2 , CO, NO2 , NO, and O3 )
                            at six locations in the area of Bilbao, Spain, during the year 2000, and the prediction models
                            were tested upon the data from 2001. The created prediction models show diversity in
                            accuracy when comparing different pollutants and measuring sensors. Zhou et al. present
                            a novel spatiotemporal interpolation model that combines data fusion techniques with a
                            Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) recurrent neural network (RNN) in order to achieve
                            high estimation accuracy over a long time period [44]. Data fusion is performed upon
                            the meteorological data, elevation data, land-use data, and daily PM2.5 data collected
                            from China in 2016, to be used within four experiments to evaluate the efficiency and
                            effectiveness of the proposed approach.
                                  The linear regression method is implemented within the applied artificial intelligence
                            methods and tools. Zheng et al. present the system that enables weather and air quality
                            forecasts, based on the use of linear regression and neural networks [28]. Mani et al. present
                            results in the forecasting of the Air Quality Index (AQI) by using machine learning tech-
                            niques: linear regression and time series analysis with supervised machine learning [32].
                            Sensor output was related to NO2 , ozone (O3 ), PM2.5, and SO2 data concentrations, and
                            they were used to train a regression model. The obtained prediction model was validated
                            with new sensor output data, and the performance has been analyzed. The Auto Regressive
                            Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) time series model is applied to forecast the AQI.
                            Alsoltany and Alnaqash present the results of an application of the fuzzy linear regression
                            method, with data collected daily from three air quality monitoring stations in Baghdad
                            City [33]. Roy et al. propose a combination of linear regression and genetic algorithm
                            methods for application, as well as multivariate polynomial regression [34]. Linear regres-
                            sion is used for the prediction of gas concentration, while a genetic algorithm approach is
                            used to optimize results, i.e., to minimize errors in linear regression prediction. Predictive
                            equations are formed for CO, O3, and NO2 based on data values for temperature, relative
                            humidity, benzene, and NOx .
Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 3617                                                                                            4 of 16




                                  Some research results are related to the application of the linear regression method to
                            the prediction of particular air pollutant concentrations. A multivariate linear regression
                            model was proposed to enable short-term period prediction of PM2.5 based on data on
                            aerosol optical depth (AOD) obtained through remote sensing, meteorological factors from
                            ground monitoring (wind velocity, temperature, and relative humidity), and other gaseous
                            pollutants (SO2 , NO2 , CO, and O3 ) [32]. The validity of the derived regression models
                            has been measured, and it has been shown that annual data predictions have a lower
                            fit compared to seasonal predictions (spring and winter data), which are more accurate.
                            Choi and Choi presented results in creating multiple statistical models for prediction of
                            PM10, PM2.5, and PM1 based on local meteorological parameters (air temperature, wind
                            speed, and relative humidity), PM10 and PM2.5 concentrations, and dust periods [33]. This
                            statistical modeling has been created based on the data from Beijing, China, and applied
                            to Gangneung, Korea. The correlation among PM10, PM2.5, and PM1 concentrations is
                            represented as multiple correlation coefficients, and the prediction of PM concentration
                            has shown a significant level of multi-regression significance when the observed and
                            calculated PM concentrations were compared. The prediction of the next day’s hourly
                            ozone concentration was studied in [37]. In this research, feedforward artificial neural
                            networks are proposed to use principal components as inputs. The developed model was
                            compared with multiple linear regression, feedforward artificial neural networks based
                            on the original data, and also with principal component regression. It has been shown
                            that the proposed use of principal components reduced complexity in the application of
                            compared methods and eliminated data collinearity. Land-use regression (LUR) models are
                            used to estimate air pollution in epidemiologic research, and they use data obtained from
                            a small set of locations, so geographical location could not impact the prediction results.
                            Basagaña et al. presented one of such studies that use LUR, where the health effects of
                            air pollution were examined [38]. Land-use regression has been used at the regional level
                            (national level in the USA) regarding NO2 measurements and predictions performed with
                            satellite data [39].
                                  The basic R system Is constantly enhanced by several hundreds of contributed pack-
                            ages that cover a wide array of modern statistical methods and application areas [14]. With
                            millions of lines of R code available in repositories stored on the Internet, researchers and
                            programmers have an opportunity to use a combination of static and dynamic program
                            features for various analyses [45]. In recent years, the R language has been frequently
                            used in scientific research, especially in ecology and environmental protection. R was
                            used for weather monitoring and rain gauge observation [19]. The result was a free and
                            open-source R program with the purpose of computing merged data from radar and rain
                            gauges. Another example of using R is described in the work of Kembel et al., who intro-
                            duce Picante, a package created to extend R with tools for analyzing phylogenetic and trait
                            diversity of ecological communities, calculating phylogenetic diversity metrics, performing
                            trait comparative analyses, etc. [20]. Stanke et al. present an additional R package, rFIA,
                            created for the purpose of forest data analysis with the use of the FIA database, which
                            was created to support monitoring of changes in forests across the USA [21]. R has been
                            used for creating an image analysis framework designed to detect land cover types and
                            vegetation corresponding to the spectral reflectance of the objects represented on the Earth’s
                            surface [22]. The R model is used with images obtained from sensor scenes (Landsat-8
                            Operational Lang Imager and Thermal Infrared Sensor). The image data were processed
                            by using different auxiliary packages of R. Results of using the R-based image analysis
                            framework were created based on time series of the images taken at various periods to
                            monitor the landscape dynamics in the Congo River basin.
                                  Seo et al. present results of using R as a statistical software to analyze a large amount
                            of air pollution data in Korea [23]. Setiawan presents results that are related to utilizing
                            R and R Studio for the prediction of nitrogen dioxide pollution, with particular emphasis
                            on the comparison of the autoregressive integrated moving average and the exponential
                            smoothing model [24]. Carslaw and Ropkins describe openair as an R package developed
Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 3617                                                                                              5 of 16




                            for the analysis of air pollution measurement data, but it could also be used in broader
                            atmospheric sciences [25]. The authors present the development of open-air additional
                            features such as conditioning plots and inference possibilities, which enable better results
                            in air pollution data analysis. The use of this package is illustrated with data obtained from
                            UK air pollution monitoring networks. Selvi and Chandrasekaran present data mining
                            with air pollution data by utilizing the open-air and ropenaq packages of R [40]. Derived
                            patterns are used to enable the creation of predictive models for environmental issues.

                            3. Materials and Methods
                                  Scientific data are often stored in formats not suitable for analysis and processing.
                            Making applications that work with the diversity of data sources and growing databases
                            has become an emerging topic since rapid data availability and processing could be a
                            limiting factor for end-users [8]. The methodology and procedures used in this research
                            include air pollution data collection, pre-processing with the use of the linear regression
                            method, and processing in the prediction. Results of air pollutant values in this research are
                            presented with the use of measurement units as mass units in the volume unit, taking them
                            as related to time. These measurement units could be used over a long period of time for
                            measuring concentrations of gases at shorter intervals [12]. Figure 1 presents a flowchart
                            that visualizes the proposed method of using the R program within the air pollution
                            prediction system. Data collection used in this research consists of air pollution data
                            obtained from the official web site of the Environmental Protection Agency, affiliated with
                            the Ministry of Environmental Protection, Belgrade, Republic of Serbia. Raw measurement
                            data are presented at this website, since 2008, each hour of every day, obtained from
                            automatic data acquisition stations that are located at different places, especially in cities (at
                            crowded streets, industrial zones), but also at protected natural regions in the Republic of
                            Serbia. Measurement data are presented comparatively for multiple measurement stations
                            for each hour [46] or with a detailed data view for every measurement station, each day,
                            and every hour [47].
                                  The sample data for this research was downloaded from [47]. It consists of data related
                            to the January-March period in 2021 and 2022 and particularly selected for Serbia’s capital
                            city, Belgrade. The observed period was from January to March in both years, since it was
                            the winter period, when pollution is expected to be higher. Selecting a seasonal sample
                            (winter) is aligned with the results of Zhao et al., where better accuracy of a mathematical
                            model was created with linear regressions from seasonal data compared to annual data
                            samples [32]. The City of Belgrade was selected as a very crowded urban area with large
                            industrial and residential parts and heavy traffic. The sample consists of 378 measured
                            air pollutant concentrations in 2021 and 567 measurements in 2022 for the following
                            components: sulphur dioxide (SO2 ), particulate matter (PM10, PM2.5), carbon monoxide
                            (CO), and nitrite oxides (NO, NO2 , and NOX ). All sample air pollutant values were obtained
                            from the data source as raw data represented with the use of the measurement unit µg/m3 ,
                            while CO values were represented with the mg/m3 measurement unit. In addition to these
                            measurements, the sample data also contain the following meteorological conditions: air
                            temperature (T, Celsius scale), relative humidity (rh, percentage), and atmospheric pressure
                            (p, millibar measures).
                                  The obtained sample data from the web site as a source was transformed into a tab-
                            delimited text file, suitable for loading into the R GUI (Figure 2), with a data structure
                            consisting of city/time/SO2 /NO2 /NOX /CO/NO/PM2.5/PM10/p/T/rh. The T symbol
                            is regularly used for temperature, while in this research, the sample presents temperature
                            with the symbol t. Data vectors, created from the loaded text file, are used to obtain a linear
                            regression function that establishes the correlation of measured values of two air pollutants.
Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                           6 of 18
 Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 3617                                                                                                         6 of 16




  Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                           7 of 18
                                   Figure 1. Flowchart presenting the proposed method in an air pollution prediction system, based on
                                  Figure 1. Flowchart
                                   the developed      presenting the proposed method in an air pollution prediction system, based
                                                 R program.
                                  on the developed R program.

                                       The obtained sample data from the web site as a source was transformed into a tab-
                                  delimited text file, suitable for loading into the R GUI (Figure 2), with a data structure
                                  consisting of city/time/SO2/NO2/NOX/CO/NO/PM2.5/PM10/p/T/rh. The T symbol is regu-
                                  larly used for temperature, while in this research, the sample presents temperature with
                                  the symbol t. Data vectors, created from the loaded text file, are used to obtain a linear
                                  regression function that establishes the correlation of measured values of two air pollu-
                                  tants.




                                    Figure2.2. Air
                                    Figure     Airpollutants
                                                   pollutantsand
                                                             andmeteorological
                                                                 meteorologicalmeasured
                                                                               measuredvalues
                                                                                        valuesloaded
                                                                                               loadedinto
                                                                                                      intothe
                                                                                                           theRRGUI.
                                                                                                                GUI.

                                         The
                                           Thecreated
                                               createdRRprogram
                                                           programenables
                                                                      enablesthe
                                                                              the creation
                                                                                  creationof
                                                                                           of linear
                                                                                               linear regression
                                                                                                      regressionfunctions
                                                                                                                  functions(on(onall
                                                                                                                                  allpairs
                                                                                                                                      pairs
                                   of
                                    of air pollutants and meteorological parameter values), graphical representation of
                                       air pollutants  and   meteorological    parameter   values),   graphical  representation    of data
                                                                                                                                      data
                                   correlation
                                    correlationininthe
                                                    theform
                                                         formofofcolorized
                                                                   colorizedcorrelation
                                                                             correlationheat maps
                                                                                          heat   mapsand linear
                                                                                                       and      regression
                                                                                                            linear regressiondiagrams,  as
                                                                                                                                diagrams,
                                   well  as the
                                    as well     use use
                                             as the  of linear  regression
                                                          of linear        functions
                                                                     regression       and Rand
                                                                                functions    language    functions
                                                                                                  R language        for thefor
                                                                                                               functions     prediction of
                                                                                                                               the predic-
                                    tion of air pollution data. Finally, results of data processing (i.e., air pollutant value pre-
                                    diction) are organized according to categories of air pollutant concentrations and air qual-
                                    ity: excellent, good, acceptable, polluted, very polluted, as defined by the Environmental
                                    Protection Agency [48].
Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 3617                                                                                                              7 of 16




                                        air pollution data. Finally, results of data processing (i.e., air pollutant value prediction) are
                                        organized according to categories of air pollutant concentrations and air quality: excellent,
                                        good, acceptable, polluted, very polluted, as defined by the Environmental Protection
                                        Agency [48].
                                             The program used in this research was written using the R programming language
                                        within the R GUI (graphical user interface) editor, created by R Team (The R Foundation
                                        for Statistical Computing c/o Institute for Statistics and Mathematics, Vienna, Austria) [16].
     Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW
                                        Figures 3 and 4 present the first and second parts of the created R program8within   of 18
                                                                                                                                    the R
                                        GUI development environment, respectively.




                                   Figure 3.
                                  Figure  3. Created
                                             Createdthe
                                                      thefirst
                                                           firstpart
                                                                 partof of
                                                                        thethe
                                                                            R program withwith
                                                                               R program  creating data vectors,
                                                                                               creating          relations
                                                                                                         data vectors,     with linear
                                                                                                                         relations with linear
                                   regression, and drawing diagrams in the R GUI.
                                  regression, and drawing diagrams in the R GUI.
                                        Predicting air pollutant values is possible with a predictor vector, response vector,
                                       The first command in the newly created R program is used for setting the working
                                   and linear regression function (Figure 4). Commands for this purpose are listed below:
                                  directory  in R with<-the
                                        linear_model         setwd(path) procedure. The second command
                                                         lm (vectorpollutantA~vectorpollutantB,data               is reading data from
                                                                                                        = datatable)
                                  an external   tab-delimited    .txt file that includes  the stored  data
                                        variable_vectorpollutantB<- data.frame(vectorpollutantBprediction)  about    air pollutants and
                                  meteorological
                                        predict    conditions measured values
                                                   (linear_model,newdata        = with    the read.table() function. It creates
                                                                                     variable_vectorpollutantB)predict      (lin- a table
                                  data  structure with= avariable_vectorpollutantB,
                                   ear_model,newdata        title row that contains interval
                                                                                       names =for   each column. The third step is
                                                                                                 ‘confidence’)
                                  creating vectors for measured pollutant values from the previously created table with the
                                  “<-“ operator for assigning values to R structures:
                                       vector <- datatable$columnname
                                       In this program, we created vectors for all pollutants and measured temperature,
                                  pressure, and relative humidity.
                                       Establishing relations with linear regression between pollutants was conducted with
                                  the “lm()” function in R (Figure 3):
                                       lm (vectorpollutant2~vectorpollutant1), where vectorpollutant1 is x and vectorpollu-
                                  tant2 is y in the linear function y = ax + b.
Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 3617                                                                                                                           8 of 16
     Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                              9 of 18




                                       Figure 4. Created the second part of the R program, which deals with predicting air pollutants val-
                                      Figure 4. Created the second part of the R program, which deals with predicting air pollutants values,
                                       ues, fitting the linear model, and printing the results.
                                      fitting the linear model, and printing the results.
                                            A linear model is created by applying the lm function to two datasets (data vectors),
                                       whereDrawing
                                               the first diagrams
                                                         parameter for   willthe
                                                                              have obtained
                                                                                     the y rolemathematical
                                                                                                  and the second   models
                                                                                                                     parameterwas data
                                                                                                                                    completed    with three
                                                                                                                                        vector has
                                      commands       (Figure    3).  First,  we    defined   a  .png   image    with   a  name:
                                       the x role in the resulting linear function. The linear model is a mathematical function
                                            png (filethe
                                       representing    = “imagefilename.png”)
                                                            data vectors correlation. The predict() function from the R language was
                                       usedAfter   this command,
                                             to predict                   the plot
                                                          the future values           function
                                                                                  based   on the creates
                                                                                                   previouslythe created
                                                                                                                 diagram      based
                                                                                                                           linear     on the
                                                                                                                                   model  andresults
                                                                                                                                               pre- of the
                                      lm  function,
                                       diction         while
                                                input data       the dev.off
                                                              vector.             function
                                                                       For the purpose     of saves    the diagram
                                                                                              prediction,                in avector
                                                                                                              another data     file named    with the png
                                                                                                                                     was prepared
                                       as an inputand
                                      command        datastored
                                                             set of at
                                                                     airthe
                                                                         pollutant
                                                                             location values   or meteorological
                                                                                         defined    by the setwd data.command.Upon these data, as
                                       well Predicting
                                            as with the airlinear  model, the
                                                               pollutant          predict()
                                                                              values         function
                                                                                       is possible       of the
                                                                                                      with      R language
                                                                                                             a predictor       was used
                                                                                                                             vector,      to derive
                                                                                                                                     response    vector, and
                                       the predicted   values.    The   next   step was   to execute    the  predict()
                                      linear regression function (Figure 4). Commands for this purpose are listed      function    again, this time
                                                                                                                                             below:
                                       withlinear_model
                                             the third parameter        of the function call being used for checking the
                                                               <- lm (vectorpollutantA~vectorpollutantB,data                         “confidence”
                                                                                                                                  = datatable)
                                       level in predicted values, i.e., to enable the calculations of prediction accuracy, i.e., the
                                            variable_vectorpollutantB<- data.frame(vectorpollutantBprediction)
                                       preciseness of the mathematical model obtained with linear regression (Figure 4). Finally,
                                            predict (linear_model,newdata = variable_vectorpollutantB)predict (linear_model,
                                       the summary command in R provides statistics related to the obtained linear model as
                                      newdata     = variable_vectorpollutantB,
                                       well as statistics  related to prediction fitting   interval    = ‘confidence’)
                                                                                              (i.e., a statistical computation of the accuracy
                                       of the computed mathematical model that was usedlm
                                            A  linear  model      is created     by  applying     the    forfunction    to two datasets (data vectors),
                                                                                                              prediction).
                                      where the first parameter will have the y role and the second parameter data vector has
                                      the  x role and
                                       4. Results  in the   resulting linear function. The linear model is a mathematical function
                                                         Discussion
                                      representing
                                             Comparing todata
                                                        the        vectors
                                                              previously     correlation.
                                                                          published   works,The   predict()
                                                                                              where          function
                                                                                                     R was used          from
                                                                                                                   for other     the R language
                                                                                                                             ecology-re-
                                      was
                                       lated research, air pollution data was processed with special R packages, and linear model
                                            used   to predict   the  future  values   based   on the  previously    created   linear   re-    and
                                      prediction
                                       gression was input
                                                       used data   vector.
                                                             for other       For the
                                                                        purposes,  andpurpose     of prediction,
                                                                                        the diversity                another
                                                                                                      of software tools   and data    vector was
                                                                                                                                technolo-
                                       gies, this work
                                      prepared    as ancontributes
                                                          input data  with
                                                                        setthe
                                                                            of detailed presentation
                                                                               air pollutant   valuesofora specially created R
                                                                                                           meteorological        program
                                                                                                                              data.  Upon these
                                       by using
                                      data,       R Language
                                             as well             statements,
                                                       as with the            and this
                                                                     linear model,   theprogram  enables
                                                                                         predict()         dataofcorrelation
                                                                                                    function                  with linear
                                                                                                                  the R language     was used to
                                       regression,  fitting of the  derived  mathematical   functions, and  prediction
                                      derive the predicted values. The next step was to execute the predict() function   of air pollution
                                                                                                                                       again, this
                                       data.with the third parameter of the function call being used for checking the “confidence”
                                      time
                                      level in predicted values, i.e., to enable the calculations of prediction accuracy, i.e., the
                                      preciseness of the mathematical model obtained with linear regression (Figure 4). Finally,
                                      the summary command in R provides statistics related to the obtained linear model as well
                                      as statistics related to prediction fitting (i.e., a statistical computation of the accuracy of the
                                      computed mathematical model that was used for prediction).
Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 3617                                                                                                        9 of 16




                                4. Results and Discussion
                                           Comparing to previously published works, where R was used for other ecology-related
                                     research, air pollution data was processed with special R packages, and linear regression
                                     was used for other purposes, and the diversity of software tools and technologies, this
 Appl.
 Appl. Sci.
       Sci. 2023,
            2023, 13,
                  13, xx FOR
                         FOR PEER
                             PEER REVIEW
                                  REVIEW                                                                                   10 of
                                                                                                                              of 18
                                     work contributes with the detailed presentation of a specially created R program by10  using18

                                     R Language statements, and this program enables data correlation with linear regression,
                                     fitting of the derived mathematical functions, and prediction of air pollution data.
                                            Results
                                           Results
                                            Resultsofof executing
                                                     ofexecuting   the
                                                        executingthetheRR program
                                                                        Rprogram
                                                                          programinin processing
                                                                                   inprocessing  linear
                                                                                      processinglinear   regression
                                                                                                  linearregression  and
                                                                                                         regressionand  prediction
                                                                                                                    andprediction
                                                                                                                        prediction
                                      statistics
                                     statistics  are
                                      statisticsare  presented
                                                 arepresented  with
                                                     presentedwith
                                                               withoneone example
                                                                      oneexample  for
                                                                          examplefor  CO
                                                                                  forCO  (dependent)
                                                                                      CO(dependent)    and
                                                                                          (dependent)and
                                                                                                       andNONO  (independent)
                                                                                                            NO(independent)   data
                                                                                                                (independent)data
                                                                                                                              data
                                      vectors
                                     vectors   at Figures
                                      vectorsatatFigures  5 and
                                                  Figures55and  6.
                                                            and6.6.




                                 Figure
                                 Figure5.5.
                                Figure      Example
                                         5.Example
                                            Exampleof of
                                                      ofRR  program
                                                         Rprogram    execution
                                                            programexecution   for
                                                                     executionfor  linear
                                                                               forlinear   regression
                                                                                    linearregression  upon
                                                                                           regressionupon  CO
                                                                                                      uponCO  and
                                                                                                           COand  NO
                                                                                                              andNO  pairs
                                                                                                                  NOpairs  or
                                                                                                                     pairsor  vectors
                                                                                                                           orvectors
                                                                                                                              vectors
                                 and the
                                 andthe
                                and       resulting
                                     theresulting   statistics
                                          resultingstatistics  regarding
                                                    statisticsregarding  mathematical
                                                               regardingmathematical    model
                                                                         mathematicalmodel      accuracy.
                                                                                        modelaccuracy.
                                                                                                accuracy.




                                 Figure
                                 Figure6.6.
                                         6. Example
                                            Example of
                                                    of results from  executing the   predict function  for CO  data vectors based on
                                                                                                                                  on cor-
                                Figure      Example of results
                                                        results from
                                                                 fromexecuting
                                                                      executingthethepredict
                                                                                       predictfunction forfor
                                                                                                function    COCO
                                                                                                               data vectors
                                                                                                                  data      based
                                                                                                                       vectors based cor-
                                                                                                                                      on
                                 relation
                                 relation with
                                          with NO
                                               NO (within
                                                   (within the
                                                           the  execution
                                                                 execution of
                                                                           of the
                                                                              the created
                                                                                  created R
                                                                                          R program).
                                                                                             program).
                                correlation with NO (within the execution of the created R program).
                                      From
                                      From Figure
                                            Figure 5,5, itit could
                                                             could be
                                                                   be concluded
                                                                       concluded that
                                                                                  that the
                                                                                       the rr (correlation
                                                                                              (correlation coefficient)
                                                                                                            coefficient) for
                                                                                                                         for CO
                                                                                                                             CO values
                                                                                                                                 values
                                 being
                                 being predicted from NO values has a value of 0.8515, which could be categorized as
                                       predicted   from      NO   values  has a value of 0.8515,   which   could  be categorized    as aa
                                 high level of correlation.
                                 high level of correlation.
                                      Results
                                      Results of
                                               of executing
                                                  executing the  the created
                                                                     created RR program
                                                                                program (that
                                                                                          (that includes
                                                                                                 includes utilization
                                                                                                           utilization of
                                                                                                                       of the
                                                                                                                           the predict()
                                                                                                                               predict()
                                 R function) within the R GUI are shown in Figure 6. This is an example of successfully
Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 3617                                                                                                                           10 of 16




                                            From Figure 5, it could be concluded that the r (correlation coefficient) for CO values
                                     being predicted from NO values has a value of 0.8515, which could be categorized as a
                                     high level of correlation.
Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                              11 of 18
 Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW Results of executing the created R program (that includes utilization of the predict()                        11 of 18
                                     R function) within the R GUI are shown in Figure 6. This is an example of successfully
                                     predicting future values of a CO pollutant based on the previously generated linear model
                                     of correlated
                                    function           CO and
                                                 for each    itemNO.      Figure
                                                                      of the  input6 presents  threethere
                                                                                      data vector;     columns     of data generated
                                                                                                             are computed       values by     the predict
                                                                                                                                         of prediction
                                      function
                                     function
                                    fit, but also  for
                                                  forlwreach
                                                       each     itemof
                                                              item
                                                          (lower)       ofthe
                                                                       and the  input
                                                                               input
                                                                             upr        datavalues
                                                                                      data
                                                                                  (upper)     vector;for
                                                                                             vector;    there
                                                                                                      there    are
                                                                                                             are
                                                                                                          each      computed
                                                                                                                fitcomputed
                                                                                                                    value. This   values
                                                                                                                                 values
                                                                                                                                   way, ofitofis prediction
                                                                                                                                               prediction
                                                                                                                                                  obvious
                                      fit,
                                    that    but
                                     fit, but   also
                                           the also    lwr  (lower)
                                                      lwr (lower)
                                               prediction      function  and
                                                                       anddoes upr
                                                                             upr not(upper)
                                                                                   (upper)    values
                                                                                             values
                                                                                       provide  onlyforfor
                                                                                                        one each
                                                                                                           each   fit  value.
                                                                                                                 fit value.
                                                                                                             value,           This
                                                                                                                      but anThis     way,    itisisobvious
                                                                                                                                    way,ofitvalues
                                                                                                                              interval               obvious
                                                                                                                                                        that
                                      that
                                     that the
                                    could    the  prediction
                                             be prediction
                                                 expected in     function
                                                                function      does  not
                                                                            doesusing
                                                                   the future,           provide
                                                                                   not provide    only    one value,
                                                                                                 only onelinear
                                                                                         the underlying                 but
                                                                                                             value,function an  interval
                                                                                                                       but an interval     of   values
                                                                                                                                         of values that
                                                                                                                                as a basis.               that
                                      could
                                     could     be  expected
                                              bethis
                                            For   expected       in
                                                               in the
                                                       particular    the  future,
                                                                         future,
                                                                      case          using  the underlying
                                                                                  using the between
                                                                            of correlation    underlying      linear
                                                                                                          COlinear
                                                                                                              and NO   function
                                                                                                                      function
                                                                                                                          values, as  a basis.
                                                                                                                                 as Figure
                                                                                                                                    a basis.7 presents
                                              For
                                            For    this
                                                 this   particular
                                                       particular       case
                                                                       case   of
                                                                             of   correlation
                                                                                 correlation   between
                                                                                              between
                                    a diagram that enables comparison between the computed prediction data  CO
                                                                                                           CO   and
                                                                                                               and     NO
                                                                                                                      NO    values,
                                                                                                                          values,     Figure
                                                                                                                                     Figure
                                                                                                                                          and  77presents
                                                                                                                                                    presents
                                                                                                                                                   the  real
                                     aa  diagram
                                        diagram       that
                                                    that    enables
                                                          enables        comparison
                                                                       comparison        between
                                                                                        between    the
                                                                                                  the     computed
                                                                                                        computed        prediction
                                                                                                                       prediction
                                    measurement data for CO as being dependent on the NO values data set in the previously            data
                                                                                                                                    data     and
                                                                                                                                           and       thereal
                                                                                                                                                    the   real
                                      measurement
                                     measurement
                                    presented            data     for  CO
                                                        data forfunction.
                                                   prediction               as being   dependent    on   the NO    values  data   set
                                                                     CO as being dependent on the NO values data set in the previouslyin the    previously
                                      presentedprediction
                                     presented       predictionfunction.
                                                                     function.




                                      Figure 7. Diagram of comparatively presented real measurement data of CO and predicted values
                                        Figureof
                                       Figure
                                      (range)  7.7.Diagram
                                                    Diagram
                                                   CO,  basedofof comparatively
                                                                comparatively
                                                               on                  presented
                                                                                 presented
                                                                   linear correlation        real
                                                                                            real
                                                                                      with NO     measurementdata
                                                                                                 measurement
                                                                                                values.         dataofofCO
                                                                                                                         COand
                                                                                                                             andpredicted
                                                                                                                                 predictedvalues
                                                                                                                                           values
                                        (range)  of CO,   based   on linear correlation with NO
                                       (range) of CO, based on linear correlation with NO values. values.
                                            Figure 7 contains graphs representing predicted data for CO for each particular meas-
                                      urement Figure
                                            Figureof NO  contains
                                                      77 contains
                                                           as a lowergraphs
                                                                     graphs  representing
                                                                             representing
                                                                         (min),              predicted
                                                                                                 upperdata
                                                                                             predicted
                                                                                 fit (mid), and         data for CO
                                                                                                                 CO forfor each
                                                                                                             forpredicted
                                                                                                         (max)             each particular
                                                                                                                                    as wellmeas-
                                                                                                                                particular
                                                                                                                             value,        mea-
                                                                                                                                           as a
                                        urement
                                       surement
                                      graph        of NO as
                                              presenting    CO  lower (min),
                                                              a lower
                                                                measured (min),    fit (mid),
                                                                                  fit
                                                                               values   (mid),
                                                                                          (at the and
                                                                                                 and   upper
                                                                                                       upper
                                                                                                    same    time (max)
                                                                                                                (max)     predicted
                                                                                                                   and predicted
                                                                                                                         at  the same   value,
                                                                                                                                       value,  aswell
                                                                                                                                              as  wellsta-
                                                                                                                                          monitoring    asaa
                                                                                                                                                       as
                                        graph
                                       graph    presenting
                                              presenting     CO
                                                            CO    measured
                                                                measured        values
                                                                             values      (at(at
                                                                                             the the  same
                                                                                                   same   timetime
                                                                                                                 and  and
                                                                                                                       at  at
                                                                                                                          the  the
                                                                                                                               same
                                      tion as the NO value that was used for prediction). Since the r correlation coefficient be-  same    monitoring
                                                                                                                                      monitoring        sta-
                                                                                                                                                   station
                                        tion
                                       as theas
                                              NO the NO
                                                    value  value
                                                           that   that
                                                                was     was
                                                                      used     used
                                                                              for       for  prediction).
                                                                                   prediction).       Since   Since
                                                                                                              the  r   the  r correlation
                                                                                                                      correlation
                                      tween NO and CO is 0.8515, it is obvious from Figure 7 that the measurements and pre-                 coefficient
                                                                                                                                    coefficient  between be-
                                        tween
                                       NO   and NOCO and
                                                      is   CO  is
                                                         0.8515,  0.8515,
                                                                  it is     it
                                                                        obviousis  obvious
                                                                                     from
                                      diction graphs for CO are not very closely aligned.       from
                                                                                             Figure    7Figure
                                                                                                          that    7
                                                                                                                 the that  the  measurements
                                                                                                                      measurements         and    and   pre-
                                                                                                                                               prediction
                                        diction
                                       graphs    graphs
                                            Thefor  CO arefornot
                                                 correlation  CO   are
                                                                  very
                                                               heat     not  veryaligned.
                                                                        closely
                                                                     map,   presentedclosely     aligned.8, shows values of r correlation coeffi-
                                                                                             at Figure
                                             Thecorrelation
                                      cientsThe    correlation
                                             computed            heat
                                                           uponheat
                                                                  pairsmap,
                                                                       map,    presented
                                                                               presented
                                                                         of data    vectorsat   forFigure    8, shows
                                                                                                                shows
                                                                                                     all obtained         values
                                                                                                                          values of
                                                                                                                       parameters, of rincluding
                                                                                                                                       rcorrelation
                                                                                                                                                  aircoeffi-
                                                                                                                                         correlation  coef-
                                                                                                                                                      pol-
                                        cients
                                       ficientscomputed
                                                computed    upon
                                                             upon   pairs
                                                                     pairs of
                                      lutants and meteorological parameters. ofdata
                                                                                 data  vectors
                                                                                          vectors for  all
                                                                                                     for   obtained
                                                                                                          all  obtained parameters,
                                                                                                                            parameters,  including  air
                                                                                                                                            including   pol-
                                                                                                                                                        air
                                       pollutants
                                        lutants and and  meteorological
                                                      meteorological        parameters.
                                                                          parameters.




                                      Figure8.
                                      Figure    Correlationheat
                                              8.Correlation  heatmap
                                                                 mapwith
                                                                      withall
                                                                           allobtained
                                                                              obtainedair
                                                                                        airpollution
                                                                                           pollutionparameters
                                                                                                      parameters from
                                                                                                                  from the
                                                                                                                        the sample.
                                                                                                                            sample.
                                        Figure 8. Correlation heat map with all obtained air pollution parameters from the sample.
                                          According to the correlation heat map, the high correlation (r values from 0.9 to 0.7)
                                            According
                                      was computed    to the
                                                    with     correlation
                                                          pairs NO-NOx heat    map, theCO-NO
                                                                         (r = 0.9809),   high correlation  (r values from 0.9 to 0.7)
                                                                                               x (r = 0.8667), NO-CO (r = 0.8515),
                                       was computed   with pairs NO-NO   x (r = 0.9809), CO-NOx (r = 0.8667), NO-CO (r = 0.8515),
                                      PM2.5-PM10 (r = 0.7895), NO2-NOx (r = 0.7558), while for moderate correlation (r values
Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 3617                                                                                                 11 of 16




                                      According to the correlation heat map, the high correlation (r values from 0.9 to 0.7)
                                was computed with pairs NO-NOx (r = 0.9809), CO-NOx (r = 0.8667), NO-CO (r = 0.8515),
                                PM2.5-PM10 (r = 0.7895), NO2 -NOx (r = 0.7558), while for moderate correlation (r values
                                from 0.7 to 0.5), there are also six air pollutant pairs. It could be concluded that the
                                computed correlation between meteorological parameters and air pollutants is very low,
                                with an r value less than 0.2. Therefore, in the rest of this paper, these pairs of parameters
                                will not be presented with linear regression diagrams, predictions, and detailed statistics.
                                The linear equations (as results of the linear regression method) are presented for selected
                                (from the high, moderate, and low correlation categories) pairs of air pollutants as bivariate
                                graphical plots (Figure 9a–f) that describe their mutual dependence, i.e., inter-variable
                                correlations. Dots represent data from vectors, while lines, plotted between dots are the
                                graphical representation of a derived linear equation from the data in vectors. A detailed
                                statistical analysis of the correlation between the model and the data, apart from the
                                graphical representation (quantity of dots placed near the line), can also be conducted on
                                the basis of the statistical data presented in Tables 1–6.

                                Table 1. Summary statistics from linear regression model for PM2.5 and PM10.

  Y = 3.413 + 0.698x                                                                                            r = 0.7895

     PM2.5-PM10             Std. error                  t-value        p-value            Residual Std. error   F-statistic
       (x-Y)                 0.0405                     17.214      <2 ×   10−16   ***          7.945             296.3
                                Signif. codes: 0 ***.

                                Table 2. Summary statistics from linear regression model for CO and NO.

     Y = 143.66x − 94.94                                                                                        r = 0.8515

             CO-NO               Std. error              t-value       p-value            Residual Std. error   F-statistic
              (x-Y)                   6.751               21.28     <2 ×   10−16   ***           19.3             452.9
                                Signif. codes: 0 ***.

                                Table 3. Summary statistics from linear regression model for SO2 and NO2 .

  Y = 0.229x − 0.328                                                                                            r = 0.4468

       SO2 -NO2             Std. error                  t-value        p-value            Residual Std. error   F-statistic
         (x-Y)               0.02873                    7.988      9.18 ×   10−12   ***         4.084             63.82
                                Signif. codes: 0 ***.

                                Table 4. Summary statistics from linear regression model for CO and NO2 .

 Y = 8.428 + x39.489                                                                                            r = 0.6305

        CO-NO2              Std. error                  t-value        p-value            Residual Std. error   F-statistic
         (x-Y)                3.401                     11.609      <2 ×   10−16   ***          9.722             134.8
                                Signif. codes: 0 ***.

                                Table 5. Summary statistics from linear regression model for NO and NOX .

 Y = 36.108 + 1.755x                                                                                            r = 0.9809

       NO-NOX               Std. error                  t-value        p-value            Residual Std. error   F-statistic
        (x-Y)                0.02757                    63.64       <2 × 10−16 ***              12.27             4050
                                Signif. codes: 0 ***.

                                Table 6. Summary statistics from linear regression model for NO2 and NOX .

     Y = 4.822x − 104.375                                                                                       r = 0.7558

           NOX -NO2              Std. error              t-value       p-value            Residual Std. error   F-statistic
             (x-Y)                 0.3084                 15.637    <2 ×   10−16   ***          43.83             244.5
                                Signif. codes: 0 ***.
                                   strong (r = 0.8515), which can be seen by statistical parameters and a graph. The very high
                                   correlation was in the case of PM2.5-PM10 (r = 0.7895) and NO2-NOX (r = 0.7558), as were
                                   the high F-value and low p-value and standard errors. CO-NO2 air pollution showed a
                                   moderate correlation with the model (r = 0.6305). The weakest interdependence was
                                   shown by SO2-NO2 pollutants (r = 0.4468), who had the lowest F-value and the greatest
Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 3617                                                                                              12 of 16
                                   dispersion of data.




 Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                    13 of 18



                                  (a)                                                            (b)




                                  (c)                                                           (d)




                                  (e)                                                            (f)
                                   Figure9.9. Linear
                                  Figure      Linear regression
                                                     regression diagrams
                                                                diagrams created
                                                                          createdwithin
                                                                                  withinRRGUI
                                                                                            GUIwith
                                                                                                 withR R
                                                                                                       program (a)(a)
                                                                                                         program   PM10-PM2.5; (b)
                                                                                                                      PM10-PM2.5;
                                   CO-NO; (c) SO2-NO2; (d) NO-NOX; (e) CO-NO2; (f) NO2-NOX.
                                  (b) CO-NO; (c) SO2 -NO2 ; (d) NO-NOX ; (e) CO-NO2 ; (f) NO2 -NOX .

                                   Table 1. Summary statistics from linear regression model for PM2.5 and PM10.

   Y = 3.413 + 0.698x                                                                                              r = 0.7895
                                                                                           Residual Std. er-
      PM2.5-PM10               Std. error                  t-value        p-value                                  F-statistic
                                                                                                 ror
        (x-Y)
                                 0.0405                    17.214      <2 x 10-16 ***           7.945                296.3
                                   Signif. codes: 0 ***.
Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 3617                                                                                                            13 of 16




                                          Standard statistical parameters such as Fisher’s criterion (F), correlation coefficient (r),
                                     estimate and residual standard error, p-value, and t-value were used for model validation.
                                     According to statistical parameters, it can be seen from Tables 1–6 that we have a moderate,
                                     high, and very high positive correlation with the model. The best correlation and fit to
                                     the data is with NO-NOX pollutants (r = 0.9809), which had a high F-value and low p-
                                     values and standard errors. The correlation between CO and NO pollutants was strong
                                     (r = 0.8515), which can be seen by statistical parameters and a graph. The very high
                                     correlation was in the case of PM2.5-PM10 (r = 0.7895) and NO2 -NOX (r = 0.7558), as were
                                     the high F-value and low p-value and standard errors. CO-NO2 air pollution showed a
                                     moderate correlation with the model (r = 0.6305). The weakest interdependence was shown
                                     by SO2 -NO2 pollutants (r = 0.4468), who had the lowest F-value and the greatest dispersion
                                     of data.
                                          A good correlation between NO2 , NO, and NOX (r~0.68 to 0.98) can be explained by
                                     the chemical similarity of the compounds and the chemical pathway of their formation [49].

                                                                                    N2 + O2 → 2NO,                                       (1)

                                                                                    NO + O → NO2 ,                                       (2)
                                                                                  NO + O3 → NO2 + O2 ,                                   (3)
                                          According to the correlation heat map (Figure 8), there is a weak correlation (r < 0.5)
                                     between chemically different oxides of carbon, sulphur, and nitrogen. The specific case is
                                     CO, which establishes a high and medium correlation with all air pollutants, except with
                                     SO2 (r = 0.3349).
                                          Table 7 shows the summarized and categorized results of predicting air pollutant
                                     values for SO2 , PM10, PM2.5, CO, and NO2 . Part of the data that is the source for Table 7
                                     was previously presented in Figure 8. The categorization of program execution results
                                     (prediction data), which is presented in Table 7, has been performed according to air
                                     pollutant concentration indexes as excellent, good, acceptable, polluted, much polluted,
                                     and colored according to criteria defined by the Environmental Protection Agency of the
                                     Ministry of Environmental Protection, Republic of Serbia [48], which are aligned with
                                     the normative defined in the European Union. These values are, of course, different for
                                     each pollutant.

                                     Table 7. Summarized and categorized results of predicting air pollutant values with R.

                            Air Quality
                                                                     Excellent        Good       Acceptable   Polluted     Very Polluted
                              Index
                 PM2.5 concentration intervals                         0–15          15.01–30     30.01–55    55.01–110        >110
         number of predicted values (relation with PM10)
                            (µg/m3 )                                     3              36           33           9             0
                  NO2 concentration intervals                          0–50          50.01–100   100.01–150   150.01–400       >400
          number of predicted values (relation with SO2 )
                            (µg/m3 )                                    46              35           0            0             0
                  CO concentration intervals                            0–5           5.01–10     10.01–25     25.01–5         >50
          number of predicted values (relation with NO)
                            (mg/m3 )                                    81              0            0            0             0
                  SO2 concentration intervals                          0–50          50.01–90    90.01–180    350.01–500       >500
          number of predicted values (relation with NO2 )
                            (µg/m3 )                                    81              0            0            0             0
                 PM10 concentration intervals                          0–25          25.01–50     50.01–90    90.01–180        >180
         Number of predicted values (relation with PM2.5)
                            (µg/m3 )                                    16              37           27           1             0
                                     Note: Categories colors according to [48].


                                         According to the results presented in Table 7, it could be concluded that the great
                                     majority of predicted values could be categorized as excellent or acceptable.
Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 3617                                                                                                                  14 of 16




                                    5. Conclusions
                                          This paper contributes to the R program that enables data transformation, linear
                                    regression, mathematical model fitting, and the processing of prediction functions. This
                                    program also enables the graphical presentation of results in the form of diagrams that
                                    illustrate the correlation between pollutants. This research also contributes to the evaluation
                                    of linear regression functions for their accuracy. It has been shown that the resulting
                                    functions enable predictions with high precision; the predicted values correlate very well
                                    with the obtained data. The developed R program was created with R language statements
                                    without using specific R packages. Therefore, it could be used or easily adapted to diverse
                                    application domains. The second contribution is related to the results of data correlation
                                    with all types of air pollutants, which are included in most frequent air quality monitoring
                                    systems. It has been shown that certain air pollutant pairs of data have a high level of
                                    correlation since their linear regression function has a high level of fitting. The limitations
                                    of this work are related to several aspects. The R program was not presented entirely in this
                                    paper (because of the program’s length), but it is available at the public repository GitHub,
                                    and only the most important lines of R code are presented and explained. The second
                                    limitation is related to the sample characteristics: one city, two years, and only a winter
                                    period of three months in both years; not all atmospheric parameters were included (e.g.,
                                    data from monitoring stations in this sample do not provide wind-related data). Future
                                    work could be related to the utilization of the created R program to make predictions
                                    based on a wider set of parameters, larger data sets taken over longer periods of time, a
                                    diversity of monitoring locations, adaptation to other application domains, and improving
                                    the program to use other statistical methods supported by the R language, with a special
                                    emphasis on supporting further chemical analysis of complex interactions and processes
                                    with gasses in the atmosphere.

                                    Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Z.K. and L.K.; methodology, Z.K. and L.K.; software, Z.K.;
                                    validation, Z.K., S.F. and L.K.; formal analysis, Z.K. and S.F.; investigation, Z.K. and L.K.; resources,
                                    Z.K. and L.K.; data curation, Z.K. and S.F.; writing—original draft preparation, Z.K., S.F. and L.K.;
                                    writing—review and editing, Z.K., L.K. and S.F.; visualization, Z.K.; supervision, Z.K. All authors
                                    have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                                    Funding: This research received no external funding.
                                    Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
                                    Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
                                    Data Availability Statement: The R GUI tool is open source software that has been used in this
                                    research. It is available at https://www.r-project.org. The created R program is open-sourced and the
                                    code is available at https://github.com/AirPolWRL/APPWRL (accessed on 1 September 2022). Data
                                    for this research are obtained from http://www.amskv.sepa.gov.rs/pregledpodatakazbirni.php?lng=
                                    en (accessed on 1 January 2021). The datasets analyzed in this study are available in the repository:
                                    https://github.com/AirPolWRL/APPWRL (accessed on 1 September 2022).
                                    Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Brauer, M.; Hoek, G.; Smit, H.A.; De Jongste, J.C.; Gerritsen, J.; Postma, D.S.; Kerkhof, M.; Brunekreef, B. Air pollution and
      development of asthma, allergy and infections in a birth cohort. Eur. Respir. J. 2007, 5, 879–888. [CrossRef]
2.    Tusnio, N.; Fichna, J.; Nowakowski, P.; Tofilo, P. Air Pollution Associates with Cancer Incidences in Poland. Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 7489.
      [CrossRef]
3.    Balogun, H.A.; Rantala, A.K.; Antikainen, H.; Siddika, N.; Amegah, A.K.; Ryti, N.R.I.; Kukkonen, J.; Sofiev, M.; Jaakkola, M.S.;
      Jaakkola, J.J.K. Effects of Air Pollution on the Risk of Low Birth Weight in a Cold Climate. Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 6399. [CrossRef]
4.    McConnell, R.; Berhane, K.; Yao, L.; Jerrett, M.; Lurmann, F.; Gilliland, F.; Kunzli, N.; Gauderman, J.; Avol, E.; Thomas, D.; et al.
      Traffic, susceptibility, and childhood asthma. Environ. Health Persp. 2006, 114, 766–772. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.    Morgenstern, V.; Zutaver, A.; Cyrys, J.; Brockow, I.; Koletzko, S.; Kramer, U.; Behrendt, H.; Herbarth, O.; von Berg, A.; Bauer, P.C.; et al.
      Atopic diseases, allergic sensitization, and exposure to traffic-related air pollution in children. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 2008, 177,
      1331–1337. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 3617                                                                                                           15 of 16




6.    Olvera-García, M.A.; Carbajal-Hernández, J.J.; Sánchez-Fernández, L.P.; Hernández-Bautista, I. Air quality assessment using a
      weighted Fuzzy Inference System. Ecol. Inform. 2016, 33, 57–74. [CrossRef]
7.    Morley, D.W.; Gulliver, J. A land use regression variable generation, modelling and prediction tool for air pollution exposure
      assessment. Environ. Modell. Softw. 2018, 105, 17–23. [CrossRef]
8.    Betancourt, C.; Hagemeier, B.; Schroder, S.; Schultz, M.G. Context aware benchmarking and tuning of a TByte-scale air quality
      database and web service. Earth Sci. Inform. 2021, 14, 1597–1607. [CrossRef]
9.    Rajat, R.R.; Vaibhav, D.; Ridam, G.; Rahul, P.; Pratik, G.; Mukul, S.; Ritik, J.; Preetee, K. Prediction of Air Quality Index Using
      Supervised Machine Learning. Int. J. Res. Appl. Sci. Eng. Tech. 2022, 10, 1371–1382.
10.   Xing, H.; Zhu, L.; Chen, B.; Niu, J.; Li, X.; Feng, Y.; Fang, W. Spatial and temporal changes analysis of air quality before and after
      the COVID-19 in Shandong Province, China. Earth Sci. Inform. 2022, 15, 863–876. [CrossRef]
11.   Carmichael, G.R.; Sandu, A.; Chai, T.; Daescu, D.N.; Constantinescu, E.M.; Tang, Y. Predicting air quality: Improvements through
      advanced methods to integrate models and measurements. J. Comput. Phys. 2008, 227, 3540–3571. [CrossRef]
12.   Ilijazi, V.; Jacimovski, S.; Milic, N.; Popovic, B. Software-Supported Visualization of Mathematical Spatial-Time Distribution
      Models of Air-Pollutant Emissions. J. Sci. Ind. Res. 2021, 80, 915–923. Available online: http://op.niscair.res.in/index.php/JSIR/
      article/view/46963/465479886 (accessed on 30 August 2022).
13.   Kadivala, A.; Kumar, A. Applications of Python to evaluate environmental data science problems. Environ. Prog. Sustain. 2017, 16,
      1580–1586. [CrossRef]
14.   Dutang, C.; Goulet, V.; Pigeon, M. Actuar: An R package for actuarial science. J. Stat. Softw. 2008, 25, 1–37.
15.   Ihaka, R.; Gentleman, R. R: A Language for Data Analysis and Graphics. J. Comput. Graph. Stat. 2012, 5, 299–314.
16.   R Foundation for Statistical Computing. R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. Available
      online: https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-release/fullrefman.pdf (accessed on 7 September 2022).
17.   Csárdi, G.; Salmon, M. rhub: Connect to ‘R-hub’. Available online: https://r-hub.github.io/rhub/authors.html (accessed on 7
      September 2022).
18.   Frichot, E.; Francois, O. LEA: An R package for landscape and ecological association studies. Methods Ecol. Evol. 2015, 6, 925–929.
      [CrossRef]
19.   Guenzi, D.; Fratianni, S.; Boraso, R.; Cremonini, R. CondMerg: An open source implementation in R language of conditional
      merging for weather radars and rain gauges observations. Earth Sci. Inform. 2017, 10, 127–135. [CrossRef]
20.   Kembel, S.W.; Cowan, P.D.; Helmus, M.R.; Cornwell, W.K.; Morlon, H.; Ackerly, D.D. Picante: R tools for integrating phylogenies
      and ecology. Bioinformatics 2010, 26, 1463–1464. [CrossRef]
21.   Stanke, H.; Finley, A.O.; Weed, A.S.; Walters, B.F.; Domke, G.M. rFIA: An R package for estimation of forest attributes with the US
      Forest Inventory and Analysis database. Environ. Modell. Softw. 2020, 127, 104664. [CrossRef]
22.   Lemenkova, P.; Debeir, O. R Libraries for Remote Sensing Data Classification by K-Means Clustering and NDVI Computation in
      Congo River Basin, DRC. Appl. Sci. 2022, 12, 12554. [CrossRef]
23.   Seo, J.Y.; Lee, H.M. A study on statistical map of air pollution in Korea using R. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference
      on Computer Applications and Information Processing Technology CAIPT2017, Kuta Bali, Indonesia, 8–10 August 2017.
24.   Setiawan, I. Time series air quality forecasting with R Language and R Studio. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2020, 1450, 012064. [CrossRef]
25.   Carslaw, D.C.; Ropkins, K. openair—An R package for air quality data analysis. Environ. Modell. Softw. 2012, 27–28, 52–61.
      [CrossRef]
26.   Syafei, A.D.; Fujiwara, A.; Zhang, J. Prediction model of Air Pollutant Levels Using Linear Model with Component Analysis. Int.
      J. Environ. Sci. Dev. 2015, 6, 519–525. [CrossRef]
27.   Sethi, J.K.; Mittal, M. An efficient correlation based adaptive LASSO regression method for air quality index prediction. Earth Sci.
      Inform. 2021, 14, 1777–1786. [CrossRef]
28.   Zheng, Y.; Xiuwen, Y.; Ming, L.; Ruiyan, L.; Zhangping, S.; Eric, C.; Tiannui, L. Forecasting Fine-Grained Air Quality Based on Big
      Data. In Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Sydney,
      Australia, 10–13 August 2015; pp. 2267–2276.
29.   Siwek, K.; Osowski, S. Data Mining Methods for Prediction of Air Pollution. Int. J. Appl. Math. Comput. Sci. 2016, 26, 467–478.
      [CrossRef]
30.   Zhang, J.; Ding, W. Prediction of Air Pollutants Concentration Based on an Extreme Learning Machine: The Case of Hong Kong.
      Int. J. Environ. Res. Pub. He. 2017, 14, 114. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.   Ibarra-Berastegi, G.; Elias, A.; Barona, A.; Saenz, J.; Ezcurra, A.; Diaz de Argandona, J. From diagnosis to prognosis for forecasting
      air pollution using neural networks: Air pollution monitoring in Bilbao. Environ. Modell. Softw. 2008, 23, 622–637. [CrossRef]
32.   Zhao, R.; Gu, X.; Xne, B.; Zhang, J.; Ren, W. Short period PM2.5 prediction based on multivariate linear regression model. PLoS
      ONE 2018, 13, e0201011. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.   Choi, S.-M.; Choi, H. Statistical Modeling for PM10 , PM2.5 and PM1 at Gangneung Affected by Local Meteorological Variables
      and PM10 and PM2.5 at Beijing for Non- and Dust Periods. Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 11958. [CrossRef]
34.   Young, M.T.; Bechle, M.J.; Sampson, P.D.; Szpiro, A.A.; Marshall, J.D.; Sheppard, L.; Kaufman, J.D. Satellite-Based NO2 and Model
      Validation in a National Prediction Model Based on Universal Kriging and Land-Use Regression. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2016, 50,
      3686–3694. [CrossRef]
Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 3617                                                                                                             16 of 16




35.   Mani, G.; Viswanadhapalli, J.K.; Stonier, A.A. Prediction and forecasting of air quality index in Chennai using regression and
      ARIMA time series models. J. Eng. Res. 2022, 10, 179–194. [CrossRef]
36.   Alsoltany, S.N.; Alnaqash, I.A. Estimating Fuzzy Linear Regression Model for Air Pollution Predictions in Baghdad City. J.
      Al-Nahrain Univ. 2015, 18, 157–166. [CrossRef]
37.   Roy, S.S.; Paraschiv, N.; Popa, M.; Lile, R.; Naktode, I. Prediction of air-pollutant concentrations using hybrid model of regression
      and genetic algorithm. J. Intell. Fuzzy Syst. 2020, 38, 5909–5919. [CrossRef]
38.   Sousa, S.I.V.; Martins, F.G.; Alvim-Ferraz, M.C.M.; Pereira, M.C. Multiple linear regression and artificial neural networks based
      on principal components to predict ozone concentrations. Environ. Modell. Softw. 2007, 22, 97–103. [CrossRef]
39.   Basagaña, X.; Aguilera, I.; Rivera, M.; Agis, D.; Foraster, M.; Marrugat, J.; Elosua, R.; Künzli, N. Measurement Error in
      Epidemiologic Studies of Air Pollution Based on Land-Use Regression Models. Am. J. Epidemiol. 2013, 178, 1342–1346. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
40.   Selvi, S.; Chandrasekaran, M. Performance evaluation of mathematical predictive modeling for air quality forecasting. Cluster.
      Comput. 2019, 22, 12481–12493. [CrossRef]
41.   Iskandaryan, D.; Ramos, F.; Trilles, S. Air Quality Prediction in Smart Cities Using Machine Learning Technologies Based on
      Sensor Data: A Review. Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 2401. [CrossRef]
42.   Briggs, D.J.; Collins, S.; Elliot, P.; Fischer, P.; Kingham, S.; Lebret, E.; Pryl, K.; Van Reeuwijk, H.; Smallbone, K.; Van der Veen, A.
      Mapping urban air pollution using GIS: A regression-based approach. Int. J. Geogr. Inf. Sci. 1997, 11, 699–718. [CrossRef]
43.   Hochadel, M.; Heinrich, J.; Gehring, U.; Morgenstern, V.; Wichmann, H.E.; Kuhlbusch, T.; Link, E.; Kramer, U. Predicting
      long-term average concentrations of traffic-related air pollutants using GIS-based information. Atmos. Environ. 2006, 40, 542–553.
      [CrossRef]
44.   Zhou, X.; Tong, W.; Li, L. Deep learning spatiotemporal air pollution data in China using data fusion. Earth Sci. Inform. 2020, 13,
      859–868. [CrossRef]
45.   Morandat, F.; Hill, B.; Osvald, L.; Vitek, J. Evaluating the Design of the R language. In ECOOP 2012—Object-Oriented Programming;
      Lecture Notes in Computer Science; Noble, J., Ed.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2012; Volume 7313, pp. 104–131.
46.   Environmental Protection Agency, Ministry of Environmental Protection, Republic of Serbia. National Network of Automatic
      Stations for Air Quality Monitoring—Raw Data Obtained from Measuring Stations. Available online: http://www.amskv.sepa.
      gov.rs/stanicepodaci.php (accessed on 1 January 2021).
47.   Environmental Protection Agency, Ministry of Environmental Protection, Republic of Serbia. National Network of Automatic
      Stations for Air Quality Monitoring—Data View. Available online: http://www.amskv.sepa.gov.rs/pregledpodatakazbirni.php?
      lng=en (accessed on 1 January 2021).
48.   Environmental Protection Agency, Ministry of Environmental Protection, Republic of Serbia. National Network of Automatic
      Stations for Air Quality Monitoring—Criteria for Pollution Classification. Available online: http://www.amskv.sepa.gov.rs/
      kriterijumi.php?lng=en (accessed on 31 August 2022).
49.   Jacob-Lopes, E.; Queiroz Zepka, L.; Costa Deprá, M. Methods of evaluation of the environmental impact on the life cycle. In
      Sustainability Metrics and Indicators of Environmental Impact, Industrial and Agricultural Life Cycle Assessment; Elsevier: Amsterdam,
      The Netherlands, 2021; pp. 29–70.

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
