170 Part 3 The Validation of Scientific Knowledge
Falsification and the
Methodology of Scientific
Research Programmes¹
Imre Lakatos
SCIENCE: REASON OR RELIGION?
For centuries knowledge meant proven knowl-
edge-proven either by the power of the intellect
or by the evidence of the senses. Wisdom and
intellectual integrity demanded that one must de-
sist from unproven utterances and minimize, even
in thought, the gap between speculation and es-
tablished knowledge. The proving power of the
intellect or the senses was questioned by the scep-
tics more than two thousand years ago; but they
were browbeaten into confusion by the glory of
Newtonian physics. Einstein's results again turned
the tables and now very few philosophers or scien-
tists still think that scientific knowledge is, or can
be, proven knowledge. But few realize that with
this the whole classical structure of intellectual
values falls in ruins and has to be replaced: One
cannot simply water down the ideal of proven
truth-as some logical empiricists do-to the
ideal of "probable truth" or as some sociolo-
gists of knowledge do-to "truth by [changing]
consensus. "3.
This paper is a considerably improved version of my [1968b]
and a crude version of my [1970]. Some parts of the former are
here reproduced without change with the permission of the
Editor of the Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society. In the prep-
aration of the new version I received much help from Tad Beck-
man, Colin Howson, Clive Kilmister, Larry Laudan. Eliot
Leader, Alan Musgrave, Michael Sukale, John Watkins and John
Worrall.
2 The main contemporary protagonist of the ideal of "probable
truth" is Rudolf Carnap. For the historical background and a
criticism of this position, cf. Lakatos (1968a).
3 The main contemporary protagonists of the ideal of "truth by
consensus" are Polanyi and Kuhn. For the historical back-
ground and a criticism of this position, cf. Musgrave [1969a],
Musgrave [1969b] and Lakatos [1970].
FALLIBILISM VERSUS FALSIFICATIONISM
Dogmatic (or Naturalistic) Falsificationism.
The Empirical Basis
. According to the "justificationists" scientific
knowledge consisted of proven propositions. Hav-
ing recognized that strictly logical deductions en-
able us only to infer (transmit truth) but not to
prove (establish truth), they disagreed about the
nature of those propositions (axioms) whose truth
can be proved by extralogical means. Classical
intellectualists (or "rationalists" in the narrow
sense of the term) admitted very varied-and
powerful sorts of extralogical "proofs" by reve-
lation, intellectual intuition, experience. These,
with the help of logic, enabled them to prove
every sort of scientific proposition. Classical em-
piricists accepted as axioms only a relatively small
set of "factual propositions" which expressed the
"hard facts." Their truth-value was established by
experience and they constituted the empirical ba-
sis of science. In order to prove scientific theories
from nothing else but the narrow empirical basis,
they needed a logic much more powerful than the
deductive logic of the classical intellectualists:
"inductive logic." All justificationists, whether in-
tellectualists or empiricists, agreed that a singular
statement expressing a "hard fact" may disprove a
universal theory; but few of them thought
that a finite conjunction of factual propositions
might be sufficient to prove "inductively" a uni-
versal theory.4
4 Indeed, even some of these few shifted, following Mill, the
rather obviously insoluble problem of inductive proof (of uni-
From Sections 1, 2, and 3 of "Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes"
by Imre Lakatos, in Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, Imre Lakatos and Alan Musgrave, Eds.
(1970), pp. 91-92, 94-125, 127-138, 189-195. Reprinted by permission of Cambridge University
Press.
Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes 171
Justificationism, that is, the identification of
knowledge with proven knowledge, was the dom-
inant tradition in rational thought throughout the
ages. Scepticism did not deny justificationism: It
only claimed that there was (and could be) no
proven knowledge and therefore no knowledge
whatsoever. For the sceptics "knowledge" was
nothing but animal belief. Thus justificationist
scepticism ridiculed objective thought and
opened the door to irrationalism, mysticism, su-
perstition.
This situation explains the enormous effort in-
vested by classical rationalists in trying to save the
synthetical a priori principles of intellectualism
and by classical empiricists in trying to save the
certainty of an empirical basis and the validity of
inductive inference. For all of them scientific hon-
esty demanded that one assert nothing that is un-
proven. However, both were defeated: Kantians
by non-Euclidean geometry and by non-Newto-
nian physics, and empiricists by the logical impos-
sibility of establishing an empirical basis (as Kant-
ans pointed out, facts cannot prove propositions)
and of establishing an inductive logic (no logic
can infallibly increase content). It turned out that
all theories are equally unprovable.
Philosophers were slow to recognize this, for
obvious reasons: Classical justificationists feared
that once they conceded that theoretical science is
unprovable, they would have also to concede that
it is sophistry and illusion, a dishonest fraud. The
philosophical importance of probabilism (or "neo-
Justificationism'") lies in the denial that such a con-
cession is necessary.
Probabilism was elaborated by a group of
Cambridge philosophers who thought that al-
though scientific theories are equally unprovable,
they have different degrees of probability (in the
sense of the calculus of probability) relative to the
available empirical evidence. 5 Scientific honesty
then requires less than had been thought: It con-
sists in uttering only highly probable theories; or
even in merely specifying, for each scientific the-
ory, the evidence, and the probability of the theory
in the light of this evidence.
Of course, replacing proof by probability was
a major retreat for justificationist thought. But
even this retreat turned out to be insufficient. It
was soon shown, mainly by Popper's persistent
efforts, that under very general conditions all theo-
ries have zero probability, whatever the evidence;
all theories are not only equally unprovable but
also equally improbable.
Many philosophers still argue that the failure
to obtain at least a probabilistic solution of the
problem of induction means that we "throw over
almost everything that is regarded as knowledge
by science and common sense." It is against this
background that one must appreciate the dramatic
change brought about by falsificationism in evalu-
ating theories and, in general, in the standards of
intellectual honesty. Falsificationism was, in a
sense, a new and considerable retreat for rational
thought. But since it was a retreat from utopian
standards, it cleared away much hypocrisy and
muddled thought, and thus, in fact, it represented
an advance.
First I shall discuss a most important brand of
falsificationism: dogmatic (or "naturalistic") falsi-
ficationism. Dogmatic falsificationism admits the
fallibility of all scientific theories without qualifi-
cation, but it retains a sort of infallible empirical
basis. It is strictly empiricist without being induc-
tivist: It denies that the certainty of the empirical
basis can be transmitted to theories. Thus dog-
matic falsificationism is the weakest brand of justi-
ficationism.
It is extremely important to stress that admitting
[fortified] empirical counterevidence as a final ar-
biter against a theory does not make one a dog-
matic falsificationist. Any Kantian or inductivist
will agree to such arbitration. But both the Kantian
versal from particular propositions) to the slightly less obviously
insoluble problem of proving particular factual propositions
from other particular factual propositions.
The founding fathers of probabilism were intellectualists;
Carnap's later efforts to build up an empiricist brand of probabi-
lism failed. Cf. my [1968a], p. 367 and also p. 361, footnote 2.
6 For a detailed discussion, cf. my [1968a), especially pp. 353
ff.
7 Russell [1943], p. 683. For a discussion of Russell's justifica-
tionism, cf. my [1962], especially pp. 167 ff.
8 For the explanation of this term, cf. below, footnote 14.
172
Part 3 The Validation of Scientific Knowledge
and the inductivist, while bowing to a negative
crucial experiment, will also specify conditions of
how to establish, entrench one unrefuted theory
more than another. Kantians held that Euclidean
geometry and Newtonian mechanics were estab-
lished with certainty; inductivists held they had
probability 1. For the dogmatic falsificationist,
however, empirical counterevidence is the one
and only arbiter which may judge a theory.
The hallmark of dogmatic falsificationism is
then the recognition that all theories are equally
conjectural. Science cannot prove any theory. But
although science cannot prove, it can disprove: It
"can perform with complete logical certainty  the
act of repudiation of what is false," that is, there
is an absolutely firm empirical basis of facts which
can be used to disprove theories. Falsificationists
provide new-very modest standards of scien-
tific honesty: They are willing to regard a proposi-
tion as "scientific" not only if it is a proven factual
proposition, but even if it is nothing more than a
falsifiable one, that is, if there are factual proposi-
tions available at the time with which it may clash,
or, in other words, if it has potential falsifiers.10
Scientific honesty then consists of specifying,
in advance, an experiment such that if the result
contradicts the theory, the theory has to be given
up. The falsificationist demands that once a
proposition is disproved, there must be no prevari-
cation: The proposition must be unconditionally
rejected. To (non-tautologous) unfalsifiable propo-
sitions the dogmatic falsificationist gives short
shrift: He brands them "metaphysical" and denies
them scientific standing.
Dogmatic falsificationists draw a sharp demar-
cation between the theoretician and the experi-
menter: The theoretician proposes, the experi-
menter in the name of Nature-disposes. As
Weyl put it: "I wish to record my unbounded ad-
miration for the work of the experimenter in his
struggle to wrest interpretable facts from an un-
yielding Nature who knows so well how to meet
our theories with a decisive No-or with an unau-
dible Yes."12 Braithwaite gives a particularly lucid
exposition of dogmatic falsificationism. He raises
the problem of the objectivity of science: "To
what extent, then, should an established scientific
deductive system be regarded as a free creation of
the human mind, and to what extent should it be
regarded as giving an objective account of the
facts of nature?" His answer is: "The form of a
statement of a scientific hypothesis, and its use to
express a general proposition, is a human device;
what is due to Nature are the observable facts
which refute or fail to refute the scientific hypothe-
sis (In science we hand over to Nature the
task of deciding whether any of the contingent
lowest-level conclusions are false. This objective
test of falsity it is which makes the deductive sys-
tem, in whose construction we have very great
freedom, a deductive system of scientific hypothe-
ses. Man proposes a system of hypotheses: Nature
disposes of its truth or falsity. Man invents a scien-
tific system, and then discovers whether or not it
accords with observed fact. "13
According to the logic of dogmatic falsifica-
tionism, science grows by repeated overthrow of
theories with the help of hard facts. For instance,
according to this view, Descartes's vortex theory
of gravity was refuted and eliminated by the
fact that planets moved in ellipses rather than in
Cartesian circles; Newton's theory, however, ex-
plained successfully the then available facts, both
those which had been explained by Descartes's
theory and those which refuted it. Therefore New-
ton's theory replaced Descartes's theory. Analo-
Medawar  1967), p. 144.
10 This discussion already indicates the vital importance of a
demarcation between provable factual and unprovable theoreti-
cal propositions for the dogmatic falsificationist.
"Criteria of refutation have to be laid down beforehand: It
must be agreed which observable situations, if actually ob-
served, mean that the theory is refuted" (Popper [1963], p. 38,
footnote 3).
12 Quoted in Popper [19341, Section 85, with Popper's com-
ment: "I fully agree."
13 Braithwaite [1953), pp. 367-8. For the "incorrigibility" of
Braithwaite's observed facts, cf. his  1938 . While in the quoted
passage Braithwaite gives a forceful answer to the problem of
scientific objectivity, in another passage he points out that "ex-
cept for the straightforward generalizations of observable facts
complete refutation is no more possible than is complete
proof" (11953), p. 19).
Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes
gously, as seen by falsificationists, Newton's the-
ory was, in turn, refuted-proved false-by the
anomalous perihelion of Mercury, while Einstein's
explained that too. Thus science proceeds by bold
speculations, which are never proved or even
made probable, but some of which are later elimi-
nated by hard, conclusive refutations and then re-
placed by still bolder, new and, at least at the
start, unrefuted speculations.
Dogmatic falsificationism, however, is unten-
able. It rests on two false assumptions and on a too
narrow criterion of demarcation between scien-
tific and non-scientific.
The first assumption is that there is a natural,
psychological borderline between theoretical or
speculative propositions on the one hand and fac-
tual or observational (or basic) propositions on the
other. (I shall call this following Popper-the
naturalistic doctrine of observation.)
The second assumption is that if a proposition
satisfies the psychological criterion of being fac-
tual or observational (or basic) then it is true; one
may say that it was proved from facts. (I shall call
this the doctrine of observational (or experimental)
proof.)14
These two assumptions secure for the dog-
matic falsificationist's deadly disproofs an empiri-
cal basis from which proven falsehood can be car-
ried by deductive logic to the theory under test.
These assumptions are complemented by a de-
marcation criterion: Only those theories are "sci-
entific" which forbid certain observable states of
affairs and therefore are factually disprovable. Or,
a theory is "scientific" is it has an empirical ba-
sis. 15
14 For these assumptions and their criticism, cf. Popper (1934),
Sections 4 and 10. It is because of this assumption that follow-
ing Popper- call this brand of falsificationism "naturalistic."
Popper's "basic propositions" should not be confused with the
basic propositions discussed in this section; cf. below, footnote
35.
It is important to point out that these two assumptions are
also shared by many justificationists who are not falsifica-
tionists: They may add to experimental proofs "intuitive
proofs"-as did Kant-or "inductive proofs" as did Mill. Our
falsificationist accepts experimental proofs only.
15 The empirical basis of a theory is the set of its potential falsifi-
ers: the set of those observational propositions which may dis-
prove it.
173
But both assumptions are false. Psychology
testifies against the first, logic against the secona,
and, finally, methodological judgment testifies
against the demarcation criterion. I shall discuss
them in turn.
1. A first glance at a few characteristic examples
already undermines the first assumption. Gali-
leo claimed that he could "observe" moun-
tains on the moon and spots on the sun and
that these "observations" refuted the time-ho-
noured theory that celestial bodies are faultless
crystal balls. But his "observations" were not
"observational" in the sense of being observed
by the-unaided-senses: Their reliability de-
pended on the reliability of his telescope
and of the optical theory of the telescope-
which was violently questioned by his
contemporaries. It was not Galileo's-pure,
untheoretical observations that confronted
Aristotelian theory but rather Galileo's "obser-
vations" in the light of his optical theory that
confronted the Aristotelians' "observations" in
the light of their theory of the heavens.
This leaves us with two inconsistent theories,
prima facia on a par. Some empiricists may
concede this point and agree that Galileo's
"observations" were not genuine observa-
tions; but they still hold that there is a "natural
demarcation" between statements impressed
on an empty and passive mind directly by the
senses-only these constitute genuine "imme-
diate knowledge" and between statements
which are suggested by impure, theory-im-
pregnated sensations.
But it transpires
from the work of Kant and Popper. that
there are and can be no sensations unim-
pregnated by expectations and therefore there
is no natural (i.e., psychological) demarcation
between observational and theoretical propo-
sitions..
2. But even if there was such a natural demarca-
tion, logic would still destroy the second as-
sumption of dogmatic falsificationism. For the
truth-value of the "observational" proposi-
tions cannot be indubitably decided: No fac-
tual proposition can ever be proved from an
کی
15 2
174
Part 3 The Validation of Scientific Knowledge
experiment. Propositions can only be derived
from other propositions, they cannot be de-
rived from facts: One cannot prove statements
from experiences-"no more than by thump-
ing the table. "16 This is one of the basic points
of elementary logic, but one which is under-
stood by relatively few people even today. 17
If factual propositions are unprovable, then
they are fallible. If they are fallible, then
clashes between theories and factual proposi-
tions are not "falsifications" but merely incon-
sistencies. Our imagination may play a greater
role in the formulation of "theories" than in
the formulation of "factual propositions", 18
but they are both fallible. Thus we cannot
prove theories and we cannot disprove them
either.19 The demarcation between the soft,
unproven "theories" and the hard, proven
"empirical basis" is nonexistent: All proposi-
tions of science are theoretical and, incurably,
fallible.
3. Finally, even if there were a natural demarca-
tion between observation statements and theo-
ries, and even if the truth-value of observation
statements could be indubitably established,
dogmatic falsificationism would still be useless
for eliminating the most important class of
what are commonly regarded as scientific the-
ories. For even if experiments could prove ex-
perimental reports, their disproving power
would still be miserably restricted: Exactly the
most admired scientific theories simply fail to
forbid any observable state of affairs.
16 Cf. Popper  1934], Section 29.
17 It seems that the first philosopher to emphasize this might
have been Fries in 1837 (cf. Popper [1934], Section 29, foot-
note 3). This is of course a special case of the general thesis that
logical relations, like probability or consistency, refer to propo-
sitions. Thus, for instance, the proposition "nature is consis-
tent" is false (or, if you wish, meaningless), for nature is not a
proposition (or a conjunction of propositions).
18 Incidentally, even this is questionable. Cf. below, pp. 188ff.
19 As Popper put it, "No conclusive disproof of a theory can
ever be produced"; those who wait for an infallible disproof
before eliminating a theory will have to wait forever and "will
never benefit from experience" ([1934], Section 9).
To support this last contention, I shall first tell
a characteristic story and then propose a general
argument.
The story is about an imaginary case of plane-
tary misbehaviour. A physicist of the pre-Einstein-
ian era takes Newton's mechanics and his law of
gravitation (N), the accepted initial conditions, I,
and calculates, with their help, the path of a newly
discovered small planet, p. But the planet deviates
from the calculated path. Does our Newtonian
physicist consider that the deviation was forbid-
den by Newton's theory and therefore that, once
established, it refutes the theory N? No. He sug-
gests that there must be a hitherto unknown planet
$p^{\prime}$ which perturbs the path of p. He calculates the
mass, orbit, etc., of this hypothetical planet and
then asks an experimental astronomer to test his
hypothesis. The planet $p^{\prime}$ is so small that even the
biggest available telescopes cannot possibly ob-
serve it: The experimental astronomer applies for a
research grant to build yet a bigger one. 20 In three
years' time the new telescope is ready. Were the
unknown planet $p^{\prime}$ to be discovered, it would be
hailed as a new victory of Newtonian science. But
it is not. Does our scientist abandon Newton's the-
ory and his idea of the perturbing planet? No. He
suggests that a cloud of cosmic dust hides the
planet from us. He calculates the location and
properties of this cloud and asks for a research
grant to send up a satellite to test his calculations.
Were the satellite's instruments (possibly new
ones, based on a little-tested theory) to record the
existence of the conjectural cloud, the result
would be hailed as an outstanding victory for
Newtonian science. But the cloud is not found.
Does our scientist abandon Newton's theory, to-
gether with the idea of the perturbing planet and
the idea of the cloud which hides it? No. He sug-
20 If the tiny conjectural planet were out of the reach even of the
biggest possible optical telescopes, he might try some quite
novel instrument (like a radiotelescope) in order to enable him
to "observe it," that is, to ask Nature about it, even if only
indirectly. (The new "observational" theory may itself not be
properly articulated, let alone severely tested, but he would
care no more than Galileo did.)
Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes 175
gests that there is some magnetic field in that re-
gion of the universe which disturbed the instru-
ments of the satellite. A new satellite is sent up.
Were the magnetic field to be found, Newtonians
would celebrate a sensational victory. But it is not.
Is this regarded as a refutation of Newtonian sci-
ence? No. Either yet another ingenious auxiliary
hypothesis is proposed or the whole story is
buried in the dusty volumes of periodicals and the
story never mentioned again. 21
This story strongly suggests that even a most
respected scientific theory, like Newton's dy-
namics and theory of gravitation, may fail to forbid
any observable state of affairs. 22 Indeed, some sci-
entific theories forbid an event occurring in some
specified finite spatio-temporal region (or briefly, a
"singular event") only on the condition that no
other factor (possibly hidden in some distant and
unspecified spatio-temporal corner of the uni-
verse) has any influence on it. But then such theo-
ries never alone contradict a "basic" statement:
They contradict at most a conjunction of a basic
statement describing a spatio-temporally singular
event and of a universal non-existence statement
saying that no other relevant cause is at work any-
where in the universe. And the dogmatic falsifica-
tionist cannot possibly claim that such universal
non-existence statements belong to the empirical
basis that they can be observed and proved by
experience.
Another way of putting this is to say that some
scientific theories are normally interpreted as con-
taining a ceteris paribus clause23: in such cases it
is always a specific theory together with this
clause which may be refuted. But such a refutation
21 At least not until a new research program supersedes New-
ton's programme which happens to explain this previously re-
calcitrant phenomenon. In this case, the phenomenon will be
unearthed and enthroned as a "crucial experiment".
22 Popper asks, "What kind of clinical responses would refute
to the satisfaction of the analyst not merely a particular diagno-
sis but psychoanalysis itself?" ((1963), p. 38, footnote 3.) But
what kind of observation would refute to the satisfaction of the
Newtonian not merely a particular version but Newtonian the-
ory itself?
23 This ceteris paribus clause must not normally be interpreted
as a separate premise.
is inconsequential for the specific theory under
test because by replacing the ceteris paribus
clause by a different one the specific theory can
always be retained whatever the tests say.
If so, the "inexorable" disproof procedure of
dogmatic falsificationism breaks down in these
cases even if there were a firmly established em-
pirical basis to serve as a launching pad for the
arrow of the modus tollens: The prime target re-
mains hopelessly elusive. 24 And as it happens, it is
exactly the most important, "mature" theories in
the history of science which are prima facie undis-
provable in this way. 25 Moreover, by the standards
of dogmatic falsificationism all probabilistic theo-
ries also come under this head, for no finite sam-
ple can ever disprove a universal probabilistic the-
ory26; probabilistic theories, like theories with a
ceteris paribus clause, have no empirical basis.
But then the dogmatic falsificationist relegates the
most important scientific theories on his own ad-
mission to metaphysics where rational discus-
sion-consisting, by his standards, of proofs and
disproofs has no place, since a metaphysical
theory is neither provable nor disprovable. The
demarcation criterion of dogmatic falsificationism
is thus still strongly antitheoretical.
(Moreover, one can easily argue that ceteris
paribus clauses are not exceptions, but the rule in
science. Science, after all, must be demarcated
from a curiosity shop where funny local-or cos-
mic-oddities are collected and displayed. The
assertion that "all Britons died from lung cancer
between 1950 and 1960 is logically possible and
might even have been true. But if it has been only
an occurrence of an event with minute probabil-
ity, it would have only curiosity value for the
crankish fact-collector; it would have a macabre
24 Incidentally, we might persuade the dogmatic falsificationist
that his demarcation criterion was a very naive mistake. If he
gives it up but retains his two basic assumptions, he will have to
ban theories from science and regard the growth of science as
an accumulation of proven basic statements. This indeed is the
final stage of classical empiricism after the evaporation of the
hope that facts can prove or at least disprove theories.
25 This is no coincidence.
26 Cf. Popper [1934], Chapter VIII.
176
Part 3 The Validation of Scientific Knowledge
entertainment value, but no scientific value. A
proposition might be said to be scientific only if it
aims at expressing a causal connection: Such con-
nection between being a Briton and dying of lung
cancer may not even be intended. Similarly, "All
swans are white," if true, would be a mere curios-
ity unless it asserted that swanness causes white-
ness. But then a black swan would not refute this
proposition, since it may only indicate other
causes operating simultaneously. Thus "all swans
are white" is either an oddity and easily disprov-
able or a scientific proposition with a ceteris pari-
bus clause and therefore undisprovable. Tenacity
of a theory against empirical evidence would then
be an argument for rather than against regarding it
as "scientific." "Irrefutability" would become a
hallmark of science.).
To sum up: Classical justificationists only ad-
mitted proven theories; neoclassical justifica-
tionists probable ones; dogmatic falsificationists
realized that in either case no theories are admissi-
ble. They decided to admit theories if they are
disprovable-disprovable by a finite number of
observations. But even if there were such disprov-
able theories-those which can be contradicted
by a finite number of observable facts-they are
still logically too near to the empirical basis. For
instance, on the terms of the dogmatic falsifica-
tionist, a theory like "All planets move in ellipses"
may be disproved by five observations; therefore
the dogmatic falsificationist will regard it as scien-
tific. A theory like "All planets move in circles"
may be disproved by four observations; therefore
the dogmatic falsificationist will regard it as still
more scientific. The acme of scientificness will be
a theory like "All swans are white," which is dis-
provable by one single observation. On the other
hand, he will reject all probabilistic theories to-
gether with Newton's, Maxwell's, Einstein's theo-
ries, as unscientific, for no finite number of obser-
vations can ever disprove them.
If we accept the demarcation criterion of dog-
matic falsificationism, and also the idea that facts
can prove "factual" propositions, we have to de-
clare that the most important, if not all, theories
ever proposed in the history of science are meta-
physical, that most, if not all, of the accepted pro-
gress is pseudo-progress, that most, if not all, of
the work done is irrational. If, however, still ac-
cepting the demarcation criterion of dogmatic
falsificationism, we deny that facts can prove
propositions, then we certainly end up in com-
plete scepticism: Then all science is undoubtedly
irrational metaphysics and should be rejected. Sci-
entific theories are not only equally unprovable,
and equally improbable, but they are also equally
undisprovable. But the recognition that not only
the theoretical but all the propositions in science
are fallible means the total collapse of all forms of
dogmatic falsificationism as theories of scientific
rationality.
Methodological Falsificationism. The
"Empirical Basis."
The collapse of dogmatic falsificationism because
of fallibilistic arguments seems to bring us back to
square one. If all scientific statements are fallible
theories, one can criticize them only for inconsis-
tency. But then, in what sense, if any, is science
empirical? If scientific theories are neither prov-
able, nor probabilifiable, nor disprovable, then
the sceptics seem to be finally right: Science is no
more than vain speculation and there is no such
thing as progress in scientific knowledge. Can we
still oppose scepticism? Can we save scientific
criticism from fallibilism? Is it possible to have a
fallibilistic theory of scientific progress? In particu-
lar, if scientific criticism is fallible, on what
ground can we ever eliminate a theory?
A most intriguing answer is provided by meth-
odological falsificationism. Methodological falsifi-
cationism is a brand of conventionalism; there-
fore, in order to understand it, we must first
discuss conventionalism in general.
There is an important demarcation between
"passivist" and "activist" theories of knowledge.
"Passivists" hold that true knowledge is Nature's
imprint on a perfectly inert mind: Mental activity
can only result in bias and distortion. The most
influential passivist school is classical empiricism.
"Activists" hold that we cannot read the book or
Nature without mental activity, without interpret-
Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes
ing it in the light of our expectations or theo-
ries. 27 Now conservative "activists" hold that we
are born with our basic expectations; with them
we turn the world into "our world" but must then
live for ever in the prison of our world. The idea
that we live and die in the prison of our "concep-
tual frameworks" was developed primarily by
Kant; pessimistic Kantians thought that the real
world is forever unknowable because of this
prison, while optimistic Kantians thought that God
created our conceptual framework to fit the
world. But revolutionary activists believe
that conceptual frameworks can be developed and
also replaced by new, better ones; it is we who
create our "prisons" and we can also, critically,
demolish them.
New steps from conservative to revolutionary
activism were made by Whewell and then by
Poincaré, Milhaud and Le Roy. Poincaré,
Milhaud and Le Roy preferred to explain the
continuing historical success of Newtonian me-
chanics by a methodological decision taken by
scientists: After a considerable period of initial
empirical success scientists may decide not to al-
low the theory to be refuted. Once they have
taken this decision, they solve (or dissolve) the
apparent anomalies by auxiliary hypotheses or
other "conventionalist stratagems."28 This con-
servative conventionalism has, however, the dis-
advantage of making us unable to get out of our
self-imposed prisons, once the first period of trial-
and-error is over and the great decision taken. It
cannot solve the problem of the elimination of
those theories which have been triumphant for a
long period. According to conservative conven-
tionalism, experiments may have sufficient power
to refute young theories, but not to refute old, es-
27 This demarcation and terminology is due to Popper; ct.
especially his  1934], Section 19 and his  1945 , Chapter 23
and footnote 3 to Chapter 25.
28 Cf. especially Poincaré  1891 and [1902]; Milhaud [1896);
Le Roy (1899] and [1901]. It was one of the chief philosophical
merits of conventionalists to direct the limelight to the fact that
any theory can be saved by "conventionalist stratagems" from
refutations. (The term conventionalist stratagem is Popper's; cf.
the critical discussion of Poincaré's conventionalism in his
[1934], especially Sections 19 and 20.)
177
tablished theories: As science grows, the power of
empirical evidence diminishes. 29
Poincaré's critics refused to accept his idea,
that, although the scientists build their conceptual
frameworks, there comes a time when these
frameworks turn into prisons which cannot be de-
molished. This criticism gave rise to two rival
schools of revolutionary conventionalism: Du-
hem's simplicism and Popper's methodological
falsificationism. 30
Duhem accepts the conventionalists' position
that no physical theory ever crumbles merely un-
der the weight of "refutations," but claims that it
still may crumble under the weight of "continual
repairs, and many tangled-up stays" when "the
worm-eaten columns" cannot support "the totter-
ing building" any longer31; then the theory loses
its original simplicity and has to be replaced. But
falsification is then left to subjective taste or, at
best, to scientific fashion, and leaves too much
leeway for dogmatic adherence to a favorite the-
ory.
Popper set out to find a criterion which is both
more objective and more hard-hitting. He could
not accept the emasculation of empiricism, inher-
ent even in Duhem's approach, and proposed a
methodology which allows experiments to be
powerful even in "mature" science. Popper's
29 Poincaré first elaborated his conventionalism only with re-
gard to geometry (cf. his [1891]). Then Milhaud and Le Rov
generalized Poincaré's idea to cover all branches of accepted
physical theory. Poincaré's [1902] starts with a strong criticism
of the Bergsonian Le Roy against whom he defends the empiri-
cal (falsifiable or "inductive") character of all physics except for
geometry and mechanics. Duhem, in turn, criticized Poincaré:
In his view there was a possibility of overthrowing even Newto-
nian mechanics.
30 The loci classici are Duhem's [1905] and Popper's [1934].
Duhem was not a consistent revolutionary conventionalist.
Very much like Whewell, he thought that conceptual changes
are only preliminaries to the final-if perhaps distant-"natural
classification":"The more a theory is perfected, the more we
apprehend that the logical order in which it arranges experi-
mental laws is the reflection of an ontological order." In partic-
ular, he refused to see Newton's mechanics actually "crum-
bling" and characterized Einstein's relativity theory as the
manifestation of a "frantic and hectic race in pursuit of a novel
idea" which "has turned physics into a real chaos where logic
loses its way and commonsense runs away frightened" (Pref-
ace of 1914-to the second edition of his [1905]).
31 Duhem [19051, Chapter VI, Section 10.
178 Part 3 The Validation of Scientific Knowledge
methodological falsificationism is both conven-
tionalist and falsificationist, but he "differs from
the [conservative] conventionalists in holding that
the statements decided by agreement are not [spa-
tio-temporally] universal but [spatio-temporally]
singular 32; and he differs from the dogmatic falsi-
ficationist in holding that the truth-value of such
statements cannot be proved by facts but, in some
cases, may be decided by agreement. 33
The conservative conventionalist (or method-
ological justificationist, if you wish) makes unfalsi-
fiable by fiat some (spatio-temporally) universal
theories, which are distinguished by their explana-
tory power, simplicity, or beauty. Our revolution-
ary conventionalist (or "methodological falsifica-
tionist") makes unfalsifiable by fiat
some
(spatio-temporally) singular statements which are
distinguishable by the fact that there exists at the
time a "relevant technique" such that "anyone
who has learned it" will be able to decide that the
statement is "acceptable. "34 Such a statement may
be called an "observational" or "basic" state-
ment, but only in inverted commas. 35 Indeed, the
very selection of all such statements is a matter of
a decision, which is not based on exclusively psy-
chological considerations. This decision is then
followed by a second kind of decision concerning
the separation of the set of accepted basic state-
ments from the rest.
These two decisions correspond to the two as-
sumptions of dogmatic falsificationism. But there
are important differences. First, the methodologi-
cal falsificationist is not a justificationist, he has no
illusions about "experimental proofs" and is fully
aware of the fallibility of his decisions and the risks
he is taking.
The methodological falsificationist realizes
32 Popper [1934], Section 30.
33 In this section I discuss the "naive" variant of Popper's meth-
odological falsificationism. Thus, throughout the section "meth-
odological falsificationism" stands for "naive methodological
falsificationism"; for this "naivety, cí, below, pp. 181-182.
34 Popper (1934 , Section 27.
35 Op cit. Section 28. For the non-basicness of these methodo-
logically "basic" statements, cf. e.g. Popper [1934] passim and
Popper (1959), p. 35, footnote *2.
that in the "experimental techniques" of the scien-
tist fallible theories are involved, 36 "in the light of
which" he interprets the facts. In spite of this he
"applies" these theories, he regards them in the
given context not as theories under test but as un-
problematic background knowledge, "which we
accept (tentatively) as unproblematic while we are
testing the theory."  He may call these theories-
and the statements whose truth-value he decides
in their light-"observational," but this is only a
manner of speech which he inherited from natu-
ralistic falsificationism. 38 The methodological
falsificationist uses our most successful theories as
extensions of our senses and widens the range of
theories which can be applied in testing far be-
yond the dogmatic falsificationist's range of strictly
observational theories. For instance, let us imag-
ine that a big radio-star is discovered with a system
of radio-star satellites orbiting it. We should like to
test some gravitational theory on this planetary
system a matter of considerable interest. Now
let us imagine that Jodrell Bank succeeds in pro-
viding a set of space-time co-ordinates of the plan-
ets which is inconsistent with the theory. We shall
take these statements as potential falsifiers. Of
course, these basic statements are not "observa-
tional" in the usual sense but only "'observa-
tional.'" They describe planets that neither the
human eye nor optical instruments can reach.
Their truth-value is arrived at by an "experimental
technique." This "experimental technique" is
based on the "application" of a well-corroborated
theory of radio-optics. Calling these statements
"observational" is no more than a manner of say-
ing that, in the context of his problem, that is, in
testing our gravitational theory, the methodologi-
cal falsificationist uses radio-optics uncritically, as
"background knowledge." The need for decisions
to demarcate the theory under test from unprob-
lematic background knowledge is a characteristic
36 Cf. Popper 1934), end of Section 26 and also his [1968], pp.
291-2.
37 Cf. Popper [1963), p. 390.
38 Indeed, Popper carefully puts "observational" in quotes; cf.
his [1934], Section 28.
Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes
feature of this brand of methodological falsifica-
tionism. 39 (This situation does not really differ from
Galileo's "observation" of Jupiter's satellites;
moreover, as some of Galileo's contemporaries
rightly pointed out, he relied on a virtually non-
existent optical theory-which then was less cor-
roborated, and even less articulated, than present-
day radio-optics. On the other hand, calling the
reports of our human eye "observational" only
indicates that we "rely" on some vague physiolog-
ical theory of human vision. 40)
This consideration shows the conventional el-
ement in granting-in a given context-the
(methodologically) "observational" status to a the-
ory. 41 Similarly, there is a considerable conven-
tional element in the decision concerning the ac-
tual truth-value of a basic statement which we take
after we have decided which "observational the-
ory" to apply. One single observation may be the
stray result of some trivial error: In order to reduce
such risks, methodological falsificationists pre-
scribe some safety control. The simplest such con-
trol is to repeat the experiment (it is a matter of
convention how many times).
This is how the methodological falsificationist
establishes his "empirical basis." (He uses quota-
tion marks in order "to give ironical emphasis" to
the term. 42) This "basis" can be hardly called a
"basis" by justificationist standards: There is noth-
ing proven about it-it denotes "piles driven into
a swamp."43 Indeed, if this "empirical basis"
clashes with a theory, the theory may be called
"falsified", but it is not falsified in the sense that it
is disproved. Methodological "falsification" is
very different from dogmatic falsification. If a the-
ory is falsified, it is proven false; if it is "falsified",
This demarcation plays a role both in the first and in the
Fourth type of decisions of the methodological falsificationist.
For the fourth decision, cf. below, p. 180.)
40 For a fascinating discussion. cf. Feyerabend (1969).
One wonders whether it would not be better to make a break
with the terminology of naturalistic falsificationism and rechris-
ten observational theories "touchstone theories."
Popper [1963], p. 387.
Popper [1934 , Section 30; also cf. Section 29: "The Relativ-
ty of Basic Statements."
179
it may still be true. If we follow up this sort of
"falsification" by the actual "elimination" of a
theory, we may well end up by eliminating a true,
and accepting a false, theory (a possibility which
is thoroughly abhorrent to the old-fashioned justifi-
cationist).
The methodological falsificationist separates
rejection and disproof, which the dogmatic falsifi-
cationist had conflated.
He is a fallibilist but
his fallibilism does not weaken his critical stance:
He turns fallible propositions into a "basis" for a
hard-line policy. On these grounds he proposes a
new demarcation criterion: Only those theories-
that is, non-"observational" propositions-that
forbid certain "observable" states of affairs, and
therefore may be "falsified"and rejected, are "sci-
entific"; or, briefly, a theory is "scientific" (or
"acceptable") if it has an "empirical basis." This
criterion brings out sharply the difference be-
tween dogmatic and methodological falsifica-
tionism. 44
But even these three decisions are not suffi-
cient to enable us to "falsify" a theory which can-
not explain anything "observable" without a ce-
teris paribus clause. 45 No finite number of
"observations" is enough to "falsify" such a the-
ory. However, if this is the case, how can one
reasonably defend a methodology which claims to
state-
"interpret natural laws or theories as.
ments which are partially decidable, i.e., which
are, for logical reasons, not verifiable but, in an
asymmetrical way, falsifiable 246 How can
we interpret theories like Newton's theory of dy-
namics and gravitation as "one-sidedly decid-
able"?47 How can we make in such cases genuine
"attempts to weed out false theories to find the
weak points of a theory in order to reject it if it is
falsified by the test"?48 How can we draw them
44 The demarcation criterion of the dogmatic falsificationist
was: A theory is "scientific" if it has an empirical basis (see
above, p. 173).
45 Cf. above, pp. 175-176.
46 Popper [1933].
47 Popper [1933].
48 Popper [1957),  . 133.
180
Part 3 The Validation of Scientific Knowledge
into the realm of rational discussion? The method-
ological falsificationist solves the problem by mak-
ing a further (fourth type) decision: When he tests
a theory together with a ceteris paribus clause and
finds that this conjunction has been refuted, he
must decide whether to take the refutation also as
a refutation of the specific theory. For instance, he
may accept Mercury's "anomalous" perihelion as
a refutation of the treble conjunction $N_{3}$ of New-
ton's theory, the known initial conditions, and the
ceteris paribus clause. Then he tests the initial
conditions "severely49 and may decide to relegate
them into the "unproblematic background knowl-
edge." This decision implies the refutation of the
double conjunction $N_{2}$ of Newton's theory and
the ceteris paribus clause. Now he has to take the
crucial decision: whether to relegate also the ce-
teris paribus clause into the pool of "unproblem-
atic background knowledge." He will do so if he
finds the ceteris paribus clause well corroborated.
How can one test a ceteris paribus clause se-
verely? By assuming that there are other influenc-
ing factors, by specifying such factors, and by test-
ing these specific assumptions. If many of them
are refuted, the ceteris paribus clause will be re-
garded as well corroborated.
Thus, with the help of this fourth type of deci-
sion, 50 our methodological falsificationist has fi-
nally succeeded in interpreting even theories like
Newton's theory as "scientific."
To sum up: The methodological falsificationist
offers an interesting solution to the problem of
combining hard-hitting criticism with fallibilism.
Not only does he offer a philosophical basis for
falsification after fallibilism had pulled the carpet
from under the feet of the dogmatic falsificationist,
but he also widens the range of such criticism very
considerably. By putting falsification in a new set-
ting, he saves the attractive code of honour of the
dogmatic falsificationist: that scientific honesty
49 For a discussion of this important concept of Popperian meth-
odology, cf. my [1968a), pp. 397 ff.
50 This type of decision belongs, in an important sense, to the
same category as the first decision: It demarcates, by decision,
problematic from unproblematic knowledge. Cf. above p.
179, text to footnote 39.
consists in specifying, in advance, an experiment
such that if the result contradicts the theory, the
theory has to be given up. 51
Methodological falsificationism represents a
considerable advance beyond both dogmatic falsi-
ficationism and conservative conventionalism. It
recommends risky decisions. But the risks are dar-
ing to the point of recklessness and one wonders
whether there is no way of lessening them.
Let us first have a closer look at the risks in-
volved.
Decisions play a crucial role in this methodol-
ogy-as in any brand of conventionalism. Deci-
sions, however, may lead us disastrously astray.
The methodological falsificationist is the first to
admit this. But this, he argues, is the price which
we have to pay for the possibility of progress.
One has to appreciate the dare-devil attitude
of our methodological falsificationist. He feels
himself to be a hero who, faced with two cata-
strophic alternatives, dared to reflect coolly on
their relative merits and choose the lesser evil.
One of the alternatives was sceptical fallibilism.
with its "anything goes" attitude, the despairing
abandonment of all intellectual standards, and
hence of the idea of scientific progress. Nothing
can be established, nothing can be rejected, noth-
ing even communicated: The growth of science is
a growth of chaos, a veritable Babel. For two thou
sand years, scientists and scientifically minded
philosophers chose justificationist illusions of
some kind to escape this nightmare..
Our
methodological falsificationist proudly rejects
such escapism: he dares to measure up to the full
impact of fallibilism and yet escape skepticism by
a daring and risky conventionalist policy, with no
dogmas. He is fully aware of the risks but insists
that one has to choose between some sort of meth-
odological falsificationism and irrationalism. He
offers a game in which one has little hope of win-
ning, but claims that it is still better to plav than to
give up.
But is not the firm strategy of the brand o
methodological falsificationism hitherto discussed
 See above, p. 172.
Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes 181
too firm? Are not the decisions it advocates bound
to be too arbitrary? Some may even claim that all
that distinguishes methodological from dogmatic
alsificationism is that it pays lip-service to fallibil-
m!
To criticize a theory of criticism is usually very
difficult. Naturalistic falsificationism was rela-
tively easy to refute, since it rested on an empirical
psychology of perception: One could show that it
was simply false. But how can methodological
Falsificationism be falsified? No disaster can ever
disprove a non-justificationist theory of rationality.
Moreover, how can we ever recognize an episte-
mological disaster? We have no means to judge
whether the verisimilitude of our successive theo-
ies increases or decreases. 52 At this stage we have
not yet developed a general theory of criticism
even for scientific theories, let alone for theories of
rationality 53: therefore, if we want to falsify our
methodological falsificationism, we have to do it
before having a theory of how to do it.
If we look at history of science, if we try to see
now some of the most celebrated falsifications
happened, we have to come to the conclusion that
either some of them are plainly irrational or that
they rest on rationality principles radically differ-
ent from the ones we just discussed. First of all,
our falsificationist must deplore the fact that stub-
born theoreticians frequently challenge experi-
mental verdicts and have them reversed. In the
falsificationist conception of scientific "law and
order" we have described there is no place for
such successful appeals. Further difficulties arise
from the falsification of theories to which a ceteris
paribus clause is appended. 54 Their falsification as
52 I am using here "verisimilitude" in Popper's sense: the differ-
ence between the truth content and falsity content of a theory.
For the risks involved in estimating it, cf. my (1968a), especially
pp. 395 ff.
I tried to develop such a general theory of criticism in my
 1970].
54 The falsification of theories depends on the high degree of
corroboration of the ceteris paribus clause. This, however, is
not always the case. This is why the methodological falsifica-
tionist may advise us to rely on our "scientific instinct" (Popper
[1934], Section 18, footnote 2) or "hunch" (Braithwaite  1953].
p. 20).
it occurs in actual history is prima facie irrational
by the standards of our falsificationist. By his stan-
dards, scientists frequently seem to be irrationally
slow: For instance, eighty-five years elapsed be-
tween the acceptance of the perihelion of Mercury
as an anomaly and its acceptance as a falsification
of Newton's theory, in spite of the fact that the
ceteris paribus clause was reasonably well corrob-
orated. On the other hand, scientists frequently
seem to be irrationally rash: For instance, Galileo
and his disciples accepted Copernican heliocen-
tric celestial mechanics in spite of the abundant
evidence against the rotation of the Earth; or Bohr
and his disciples accepted a theory of light emis-
sion in spite of the fact that it ran counter to Max-
well's well-corroborated theory.
Indeed, it is not difficult to see at least two
crucial characteristics common to both dogmatic
and our methodological falsificationism which are
clearly dissonant with the actual history of sci-
ence: that (1) a test is or must be made a two-
cornered fight between theory and experiment so
that in the final confrontation only these two face
each other; and (2) the only interesting outcome of
such confrontation is (conclusive) falsification:
"[the only genuine] discoveries are refutations of
scientific hypotheses. "55 However, history of sci-
ence suggests that (1') tests are at least-three-
cornered fights between rival theories and experi-
ment and (2') some of the most interesting
experiments result, prima facie, in confirmation
rather than falsification.
But if-as seems to be the case-the history of
science does not bear out our theory of scientific
rationality, we have two alternatives. One alterna-
tive is to abandon efforts to give a rational expla-
nation of the success of science. Scientific method
(or "logic of discovery"), conceived as the disci-
pline of rational appraisal of scientific theories-
and of criteria of progress-vanishes. We, may, of
course, still try to explain changes in "paradigms"
in terms of social psychology.
This is
55 Agassi [1959]; he calls Popper's idea of science "scientia
negativa" (Agassi [1968]).
182
Part 3 The Validation of Scientific Knowledge
Polanyi's and Kuhn's way. 56 The other alternative
is to try at least to reduce the conventional ele-
ment in falsificationism (we cannot possibly elimi-
nate it) and replace the naive versions of method-
⚫ological falsificationism-characterized by the
theses (1) and (2) above-by a sophisticated ver-
sion which would give a new rationale of falsifica-
tion and thereby rescue methodology and the idea
of scientific progress. This is Popper's way, and
the one I intend follow.
Sophisticated versus Naive Methodological
Falsificationism. Progressive and
Degenerating Problemshifts.
Sophisticated falsificationism differs from naive
falsificationism both in its rules of acceptance (or
"demarcation criterion") and its rules of falsifica-
tion or elimination. For the naive falsificationist
any theory which can be interpreted as experi-
mentally falsifiable is "acceptable" or "scien-
tific. "57 For the sophisticated falsificationist a the-
ory is "acceptable" or "scientific" only if it has
corroborated excess empirical content over its
predecessor (or rival), that is, only if it leads to the
discovery of novel facts. This condition can be
analysed into two clauses: that the new theory has
excess empirical content ("acceptability" ) and
that some of this excess content is verified ("ac-
ceptability" 2). The first clause can be checked in-
stantly. by a priori logical analysis; the sec-
ond can be checked only empirically and this may
take an indefinite time.
Again, for the naive falsificationist a theory is
falsified by a ("fortified" .) "observational"
statement which conflicts with it (or rather, which
he decides to interpret as conflicting with it). The
sophisticated falsificationist regards a scientific
theory T as falsified if and only if another theory T'
has been proposed with the following characteris-
tics: (1) T' has excess empirical content over T;
that is, it predicts novel facts, that is, facts improb-
56 Feyerabend, who contributed probably more than anybody
else to the spread of Popper's ideas, seems now to have joined
the enemy camp. Cf. his intriguing (1970).
57 Ct. above, p. 179.
(2)
able in the light of, or even forbidden, by $T^{.58}$
T' explains the previous success of T, that is, all
the unrefuted content of T is contained (within the
limits of observational error) in the content of T';
and (3) some of the excess content of T' is corrob-
orated. 59
In order to be able to appraise these definitions
we need to understand their problem background
and their consequences. First, we have to remem-
ber the conventionalists' methodological discov-
ery that no experimental result can ever kill a
theory: any theory can be saved from coun-
terinstances either by some auxiliary hypothesis or
by a suitable reinterpretation of its terms. Naive
falsificationists solved this problem by relegat-
ing-in crucial contexts-the auxiliary hypothe-
ses to the realm of unproblematic background
knowledge, eliminating them from the deductive
model of the test-situation and thereby forcing the
chosen theory into logical isolation, in which it
becomes a sitting target for the attack of test-exper-
iments. But since this procedure did not offer a
suitable guide for a rational reconstruction of the
history of science, we may just as well completely
rethink our approach. Why aim at falsification at
any price? Why not rather impose certain stan-
dards on the theoretical adjustments by which one
is allowed to save a theory? Indeed, some such
standards have been well known for centuries,
and we find them expressed in age-old wisecracks
against ad hoc explanations, empty prevarica-
tions, face-saving, linguistic tricks. 60 We have al-
ready seen that Duhem adumbrated such stan-
58 | use "prediction" in a wide sense that includes "postdic-
tion."
59 For a detailed discussion of these acceptance and rejection
rules and for references to Popper's work, cf. my 1968al.
pp. 375-90. For some qualifications (concerning continuity
and consistency as regulative principles), cf. below, pp. 190-
1914
50 Molière, for instance, ridiculed the doctors of his Malade
Imaginaire, who offered the virtus dormitiva of opium as the
answer to the question as to why opium produced sleep. One
might even argue that Newton's famous dictum hypotheses non
fingo was really directed against ad hoc explanations-like his
own explanation of gravitational forces by an aether-model in
order to meet Cartesian objections.
61 Cf. above, p. 177.
Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes
dards in terms of "simplicity" and "good sense."61
But when does lack of "simplicity" in the protec-
tive belt of theoretical adjustments reach the point
at which the theory must be abandoned?62 In what
sense was Copernican theory, for instance, "sim-
pler" than Ptolemaic?63 The vague notion of Du-
hemian "simplicity" leaves, as the naive falsifica-
tionist correctly argued, the decision very much to
taste and fashion.64
Can one improve on Duhem's approach? Pop-
per did. His solution-a sophisticated version of
methodological falsificationism-is more objec-
tive and more rigorous. Popper agrees with the
Conventionalists that theories and factual proposi-
tions can always be harmonized with the help of
auxiliary hypotheses: He agrees that the problem
is how to demarcate between scientific and pseu-
doscientific adjustments, between rational and ir-
rational changes of theory. According to Popper,
saving a theory with the help of auxiliary hypothe-
ses which satisfy certain well-defined conditions
represents scientific progress; but saving a theory
with the help of auxiliary hypotheses which do
not, represents degeneration. Popper calls such
Inadmissible auxiliary hypotheses ad hoc hypoth-
eses, mere linguistic devices, "conventionalist
stratagems. "65 But then any scientific theory has to
be appraised together with its auxiliary hypothe-
ses, initial conditions, etc., and, especially, to-
gether with its predecessors so that we may see by
what sort of change it was brought about. Then, of
course, what we appraise is a series of theories
rather than isolated theories.
183
Now we can easily understand why we formu-
lated the criteria of acceptance and rejection of
sophisticated methodological falsificationism as
we did. 66 But it may be worth while to reformulate
them slightly, couching them explicitly in terms of
series of theories.
Let us take a series of theories, $T_{1}$, $T_{2}$ $T_{3}$
where each subsequent theory results from adding
auxiliary clauses to (or from semantical reinterpre-
tations of) the previous theory in order to accom-
modate some anomaly, each theory having at
least as much content as the unrefuted content of
its predecessor. Let us say that such a series of
theories is theoretically progressive (or "consti-
tutes a theoretically progressive problemshift") if
each new theory has some excess empirical con-
tent over its predecessor; that is, if it predicts some
novel, hitherto unexpected fact. Let us say that a
theoretically progressive series of theories is also
empirically progressive (or "constitutes an empiri-
cally progressive problemshift") if some of this ex-
cess empirical content is also corroborated, that
is, if each new theory leads us to the actual discov-
ery of some new fact. 67 Finally, let us call a pro-
blemshift progressive if it is both theoretically and
empirically progressive, and degenerating if it is
not. 68 We "accept" problemshifts as "scientific"
only if they are at least theoretically progressive; if
they are not, we "reject" them as "pseudoscien-
tific." Progress is measured by the degree to which
a problemshift is progressive, by the degree to
which the series of theories leads us to the discov-
ery of novel facts. We regard a theory in the series
62 Incidentally, Duhem agreed with Bernard that experiments
alone-without simplicity considerations can decide the fate
of theories in physiology. But in physics, he argued, they cannot
([1905] Chapter VI, Section 1).
63 Koestler correctly points out that only Galileo created the
myth that the Copernican theory was simple (Koestler [1959].
p. 476); in fact, "the motion of the earth (had not) done much
to simplify the old theories, for though the objectionable
equants had disappeared, the system was still bristling with
auxiliary circles" (Dreyer [19061. Chapter XIII).
64 Cf. above, p. 177.
65 Popper (1934), sections 19 and 20. I have discussed in some
detail-under the heads "monster-barring." "exception-bar-
ring," "monster-adjustment" such stratagems as they appear
in informal, quasi-empirical mathematics; cf. my [1963-41.
66 Cf. above, p. 182.
67 If I already know $P_{1}$ "Swan A is white," $P_{\omega}$ "All swans are
white" represents no progress, because it may only lead to the
discovery of such further similar facts as $P_{2}$: "Swan B is white."
So-called "empirical generalizations" constitute no progress. A
new fact must be improbable or even impossible in the light of
previous knowledge. Cf. above, p. 182..
68 The appropriateness of the term "problemshift" for a series of
theories rather than of problems may be questioned. I chose it
partly because I have not found a more appropriate alterna-
tive "theoryshift" sounds dreadful-partly because theories
are always problematical, they never solve all the problems.
they have set out to solve. Anyway, in the second half of the
paper, the more natural term "research programme" will re-
place "problemshifts" in the most relevant contexts.
184
Part 3 The Validation of Scientific Knowledge
"falsified" when it is superseded by a theory with
higher corroborated content.
This demarcation between progressive and de-
generating problemshifts sheds new light on the
appraisal of scientific-or rather, progressive-ex-
planations. If we put forward a theory to resolve a
contradiction between a previous theory and a
counterexample in such a way that the new the-
ory, instead of offering a content-increasing (sci-
entific) explanation, only offers a content-decreas-
ing (linguistic) reinterpretation, the contradiction
is resolved in a merely semantical, unscientific
way. A given fact is explained scientifically only if
a new fact is also explained with it.
Sophisticated falsificationism thus shifts the
problem of how to appraise theories to the prob-
lem of how to appraise series of theories. Not an
isolated theory, but only a series of theories can be
said to be scientific or unscientific: to apply the
term "scientific" to one single theory is a category
mistake. 69
The time-honoured empirical criterion for a
satisfactory theory was agreement with the ob-
served facts. Our empirical criterion for a series of
theories is that it should produce new facts. The
idea of growth and the concept of empirical char-
acter are soldered into one.
This revised form of methodological falsifica-
tionism has many new features. First, it denies that
"in the case of a scientific theory, our decision
depends upon the results of experiments. If these
confirm the theory, we may accept it until we find
a better one. If they contradict the theory, we re-
ject it."70 It denies that "what ultimately decides
69 Popper's conflation of "theories" and "series of theories"
prevented him from getting the basic ideas of sophisticated falsi-
ficationism across more successfully. His ambiguous usage led
to such confusing formulations as "Marxism (as the core of a
series of theories or of a research programme) is irrefutable"
and, at the same time, "Marxism [as a particular conjunction of
this core and some specified auxiliary hypotheses, initial condi-
tions and a ceteris paribus clause has been refuted." (Cf. Pop-
per  1963].)
Of course, there is nothing wrong in saying that an iso-
lated, single theory is "scientific" if it represents an advance on
its predecessor, as long as one clearly realizes that in this formu-
lation we appraise the theory as the outcome of and in the
context of a certain historical development.
70 Popper [1945], Vol. II, p. 233. Popper's more sophisticated
attitude surfaces in the remark that "concrete and practical con-
the fate of a theory is the result of a test, i.e., an
agreement about basic statements. "71 Contrary to
naive falsificationism, no experiment, experimen-
tal report, observation statement or well-corrobo-
rated low-level falsifying hypothesis alone can
lead to falsification. There is no falsification
before the emergence of a better theory. 72 But then
the distinctively negative character of naive falsifi-
cationism vanishes; criticism becomes more diffi-
cult, and also positive, constructive. But, of
course, if falsification depends on the emergence
of better theories, on the invention of theories
which anticipate new facts, then falsification is not
simply a relation between a theory and the empiri-
cal basis, but a multiple relation between compet-
ing theories, the original "empirical basis," and
the empirical growth resulting from the competi-
tion. Falsification can thus be said to have a "his-
torical character. "73 Moreover, some of the theo-
ries which bring about falsification are frequently
proposed after the "counterevidence." This may
sound paradoxical for people indoctrinated with
naive falsificationism. Indeed, this epistemologi-
cal theory of the relation between theory and ex-
periment differs sharply from the epistemological
theory of naive falsificationism. The very term
"counterevidence" has to be abandoned in the
sense that no experimental result must be inter-
preted directly as "counterevidence." If we still
want to retain this time-honoured term, we have
to redefine it like this: "Counterevidence to $T_{1}^{\prime\prime}$ is
a corroborating instance to $T_{2}$, which is either in-
consistent with or independent of T, (with the pro-
viso that $T_{2}$ is a theory which satisfactorily explains
the empirical success of $T_{1}$. This shows that "cru-
sequences can be more directly tested by experiment" (ibid; my
italics).
71
Popper [1934], Section 30.
72 "In most cases we have, before falsifying a hypothesis, an-
other one up our sleeves" (Popper [1959), p. 87. footnote "I).
But, as our argument shows, we must have one. Or, as Feyera-
bend put it: "The best criticism is provided by those theories
which can replace the rivals they have removed" ([1965], p.
p. 227). He notes that in some cases "alternatives will be quite
indispensable for the purpose of refutation" (ibid, p. 254). But
according to our argument refutation without an alternative
shows nothing but the poverty of our imagination in providing a
rescue hypothesis.
73 Cf. my 1968a), pp. 387 ff.
Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes
cial counterevidence" or "crucial experi-
ments"-can be recognized as such among the
scores of anomalies only with hindsight, in the
light of some superseding theory. 74
Thus the crucial element in falsification is
whether the new theory offers any novel, excess
information compared with its predecessor and
whether some of this excess information is corrob-
orated. Justificationists valued "confirming" in-
stances of a theory; naive falsificationists stressed
'refuting" instances; for the methodological falsifi-
cationists it is the rather rare-corroborating in-
stances of the excess information which are the
crucial ones; these receive all the attention. We
are no longer interested in the thousands of trivial
verifying instances nor in the hundreds of readily
available anomalies: The few crucial excess-veri-
fying instances are decisive. 75 This consideration
rehabilitates and reinterprets the old proverb:
Exemplum docet, exempla obscurant.
"Falsification" in the sense of naive falsifica-
tionism (corroborated counterevidence) is not a
sufficient condition for eliminating a specific the-
ory: In spite of hundreds of known anomalies we
do not regard it as falsified (that is, eliminated)
until we have a better one. 76 Nor is "falsification"
in the naive sense necessary for falsification in the
sophisticated sense: A progressive problemshift
does not have to be interspersed with "refuta-
In the distorting mirror of naive falsificationism, new theories
which replace old refuted ones are themselves born unrefuted.
Therefore they do not believe that there is a relevant difference
between anomalies and crucial counterevidence. For them,
anomaly is a dishonest euphemism for counterevidence. But in
actual history new theories are born refuted: They inherit many
anomalies of the old theory. Moreover, frequently it is only the
new theory which dramatically predicts that fact which will
function as crucial counterevidence against its predecessor,
while the "old" anomalies may well stay on as "new" anoma-
lies.
Sophisticated falsificationism adumbrates a new theory of
learning; cf. below, p. 186.
76 It is clear that the theory T' may have excess corroborated
empirical content over another theory T even if both T and T
are refuted. Empirical content has nothing to do with truth or
falsity. Corroborated contents can also be compared irrespec-
tive of the refuted content. Thus we may see the rationality of
the elimination of Newton's theory in favour of Einstein's, even
though Einstein's theory may be said to have been born-like
Newton's "refuted." We have only to remember that "quali-
tative confirmation" is a euphemism for "quantitative disconfir-
mation." (Cf. my (1968a). pp. 384-6.)
185
tions." Science can grow without any "refuta-
tions" leading the way. Naive falsificationists sug-
gest a linear growth of science, in the sense that
theories are followed by powerful refutations
which eliminate them; these refutations in turn are
followed by new theories. 77 It is perfectly possible
that theories be put forward "progressively" in
such a rapid succession that the "refutation" of the
nth appears only as the corroboration of the $n+1.$
th. The problem fever of science is raised by prolif-
eration of rival theories rather than counterexam-
ples or anomalies.
This shows that the slogan of proliferation of
theories is much more important for sophisticated
than for naive falsificationism. For the naive falsifi-
cationist science grows through repeated experi-
mental overthrow of theories; new rival theories
proposed before such "overthrows" may speed up
growth but are not absolutely necessary
constant proliferation of theories is optional but
not mandatory. For the sophisticated falsifica-
tionist proliferation of theories cannot wait until
the accepted theories are "refuted" (or until their
protagonists get into a Kuhnian crisis of confi-
dence). 78 While naive falsificationism stresses
"the urgency of replacing a falsified hypothesis by
a better one, "79 sophisticated falsificationism
stresses the urgency of replacing any hypothesis
by a better one. Falsification cannot "compel the
theorist to search for a better theory, "80 simply
because falsification cannot precede the better
theory.
The problem-shift from naive to sophisticated
falsificationism involves a semantic difficulty. For
the naive falsificationist a "refutation" is an exper-
imental result which, by force of his decisions, is
made to conflict with the theory under test. But
according to sophisticated falsificationism one
must not take such decisions before the alleged
"refuting instance" has become the confirming in-
stance of a new, better theory. Therefore when-
77 Cf. Popper [1934], Section 85, p. 279 of the 1959 English
translation.
78 Also cf. Feyerabend [1965], pp. 254-5.
79 Popper [1959], p. 87, footnote *I.
80 Popper [1934], Section 30.
186
Part 3 The Validation of Scientific Knowledge
ever we see terms like "refutation," "falsifica-
tion," "counterexample," we have to check in
each case whether these terms are being applied
in virtue of decisions by the naive or by the sophis-
ticated falsificationist. 81
Sophisticated methodological falsificationism
offers new standards for intellectual honesty. Justi-
ficationist honesty demanded the acceptance of
only what was proven and the rejection of every-
thing unproven. Neojustificationist honesty de-
manded the specification of the probability of any
hypothesis in the light of the available empirical
evidence. The honesty of naive falsificationism
demanded the testing of the falsifiable and the re-
jection of the unfalsifiable and the falsified. Fi-
nally, the honesty of sophisticated falsificationism
demanded that one should try to look at things
from different points of view, to put forward new
theories which anticipate novel facts, and to reject
theories which have been superseded by more
powerful ones.
Sophisticated methodological falsificationism
blends several different traditions. From the empir-
icists it has inherited the determination to learn
primarily from experience. From the Kantians it
has taken the activist approach to the theory of
knowledge. From the conventionalists it has
learned the importance of decisions in method-
ology.
I should like to emphasize here a further dis-
tinctive feature of sophisticated methodological
empiricism: the crucial role of excess corrobora-
tion. For the inductivist, learning about a new the-
ory is learning how much confirming evidence
supports it; about refuted theories one learns noth-
ing (learning, after all, is to build up proven or
probable knowledge). For the dogmatic falsifica-
tionist, learning about a theory is learning whether
it is refuted or not; about confirmed theories one
learns nothing (one cannot prove or probabilify
81
Possibly it would be better in future to abandon these
terms altogether, just as we have abandoned terms like "induc-
tive (or experimental) proof." Then we may call (naive) "refuta-
tions" anomalies, and (sophisticatedly) "falsified" theories "su-
perseded" ones. Our "ordinary" language is impregnated not
only by "inductivist" but also by falsificationist dogmatism. A
reform is overdue..
anything) about refuted theories one learns that
they are disproved. 82 For the sophisticated falsifi-
cationist, learning about a theory is primarily
learning which new facts it anticipated; indeed,
for the sort of Popperian empiricism I advocate,
the only relevant evidence is the evidence antici-
pated by a theory, and empiricalness (or scientific
character) and theoretical progress are inseparably
connected.
This idea is not entirely new. Leibnitz, for in-
stance, in his famous letter to Conring in 1678,
wrote: "It is the greatest commendation of an hy-
pothesis (next to [proven] truth) if by its help pre-
dictions can be made even about phenomena or
experiments not tried."83 Leibnitz's view was
widely accepted by scientists. But since all ap-
praisal of a scientific theory was before Popper
appraisal of its degree of justification, this position
was regarded by some logicians as untenable.
Mill, for instance, complains in 1843 in horror
that "it seems to be thought that an hypothesis.
is entitled to a more favourable reception, if
besides accounting for all the facts previously
known, it has led to the anticipation and predic-
tion of others which experience afterwards veri-
fied."84 Mill had a point; this appraisal was in
conflict both with justificationism and with proba-
bilism: Why should an event prove more, if it was
anticipated by the theory than if it was known
already before? As long as proof was the only cri-
terion of the scientific character of a theory, Leib-
nitz's criterion could only be regarded as irrele-
vant. 85 Also, the probability of a theory given
82 For a defense of this theory of "learning from experience," cf.
Agassi  1969).
83 Cf. Leibnitz [1678). The expression in brackets shows that
Leibnitz regarded this criterion as second best and thought that
the best theories are those which are proved. Thus Leibnitz's
position-like Whewell's is a far cry from fully fledged so-
phisticated falsification:sm.
84 Mill [1843], vol. II, p. 23.
85 This was J. S. Mill's argument (ibid). He directed it against
Whewell, who thought that "consilience of inductions" or suc-
cessful prediction of improbable events verifies (that is, proves)
a theory. (Whewell [1858], pp. 95-6.) No doubt, the basic
contradiction both in Whewell's and in Duhem's philosophy of
science is their conflation of heuristic power and proven truth.
Popper separated the two.
Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes 187
evidence cannot possibly be influenced, as Key-
nes pointed out, by when the evidence was pro-
duced; the probability of a theory given evidence
can depend only on the theory and the evi-
dence, 86 and not upon whether the evidence was
produced before or after the theory.
In spite of this convincing justificationist criti-
cism, the criterion survived among some of the
best scientists, since it formulated their strong dis-
like of merely ad hoc explanations, which
"though [they] truly express the facts [they set out
to explain, are not born out by any other phe-
nomena. "87
But it was only Popper who recognized that
the prima facie inconsistency between the few
odd, casual remarks against ad hoc hypotheses on
the one hand and the huge edifice of justifica-
tionist philosophy of knowledge must be solved by
demolishing justificationism and by introducing
new, non-justificationist criteria for appraising sci-
entific theories based on anti-adhocness.
Let us look at a few examples. Einstein's theory
is not better than Newton's because Newton's the-
ory was "refuted" but Einstein's was not: There
are many known "anomalies" to Einsteinian the-
ory. Einstein's theory is better than that is, repre-
sents progress compared with-Newton's theory
anno 1916 (that is, Newton's laws of dynamics,
law of gravitation, the known set of initial condi-
tions, "minus" the list of known anomalies such
as Mercury's perihelion) because it explained
everything that Newton's theory had successfully
explained, and it explained also to some extent
some known anomalies and, in addition, forbade
events like transmission of light along straight lines
near large masses about which Newton's theory
had said nothing but which had been permit-
ted by other well-corroborated scientific theories
of the day; moreover, at least some of the unex-
pected excess Einsteinian content was in fact cor-
roborated (for instance, by the eclipse experi-
ments).
Let us finally consider how much convention-
alism remains in sophisticated falsificationism.
Certainly less than in naive falsificationism. We
need fewer methodological decisions. The
"fourth-type decision"which was essential for the
naive version88 has become completely redun-
dant. To show this we only have to realize that if a
scientific theory, consisting of some "laws of na-
ture," initial conditions, auxiliary theories (but
without a ceteris paribus clause) conflicts with
some factual propositions we do not have to de-
cide which explicit or "hidden"-part to re-
place. We may try to replace any part and only
when we have hit on an explanation of the anom-
aly with the help of some content-increasing
change (or auxiliary hypothesis), and nature cor-
roborates it, do we move on to eliminate the "re-
futed" complex. Thus sophisticated falsification is
a slower but possibly safer process than naive fal-
sification.
Let us take an example. Let us assume that the
course of a planet differs from the one predicted.
Some conclude that this refutes the dynamics and
gravitational theory applied: The initial conditions
and the ceteris paribus clause have been inge-
niously corroborated. Other conclude that this re-
futes the initial conditions used in the calcula-
tions: Dynamics and gravitational theory have
been superbly corroborated in the last two hun-
dred years and all suggestions concerning further
factors in play failed. Yet others conclude that this
refutes the underlying assumption that there were
no other factors in play except for those which
were taken into account: These people may possi-
bly be motivated by the metaphysical principle
that any explanation is only approximative be-
cause of the infinite complexity of the factors in-
volved in determining any single event. Should we
praise the first type as "critical," scold the second
type as "hack," and condemn the third as "apolo-
getic"? No. We do not need to draw any conclu-
sions about such "refutation." We never reject a
specific theory simply by fiat. If we have an incon-
sistency like the one mentioned, we do not have
86 Keynes [1921], p. 305. But cf. my [1968a , p. 394.
87 This is Whewell's critical comment on an ad hoc auxiliary
hypothesis in Newton's theory of light (Whewell [1858], Vol. II,
p. 317.)
88 Cf. above, p. 180.
188
Part 3 The Validation of Scientific Knowledge
to decide which ingredients of the theory we re-
gard as problematic and which ones as unprob-
lematic: We regard all ingredients as problematic
in the light of the conflicting accepted basic state-
ment and try to replace all of them. If we succeed
in replacing some ingredient in a "progressive"
way (that is, the replacement has more corrobo-
rated empirical content than the original), we call
it "falsified."
The first, second, and third type decisions of
naive falsificationism 89 however, cannot be
avoided, but as we shall show, the conventional
element in the second decision-and also in the
third-can be slightly reduced. We cannot avoid
the decision which sort of propositions should be
the "observational" ones and which the "theoreti-
cal" ones. We cannot avoid either the decision
about the truth-value of some "observational
propositions." These decisions are vital for the de-
cision whether a problemshift is empirically pro-
gressive or degenerating. 90 But the sophisticated
falsificationist may at least mitigate the arbitrari-
ness of this second decision by allowing for an
appeal procedure.
Naive falsificationists do not lay down any
such appeal procedure. They accept a basic state-
ment if it is backed up by a well-corroborated fal-
sifying hypothesis, 1 and let it overrule the theory
under test-even though they are well aware of
the risk. 92 But there is no reason why we should
not regard a falsifying hypothesis and the basic
statement it supports-as being just as problem-
atic as a falsified hypothesis. Now how exactly
can we expose the problematicality of a basic
statement? On what grounds can the protagonists
of the "falsified" theory appeal and win?
Some people may say that we might go on
testing the basic statement (or the falsifying hy-
pothesis) "by their deductive consequences" until
agreement is finally reached. In this testing we
89 Cf. above, pp. 178 and 179.
90 Cf. above, p. 183.
91 Popper (1934), Section 22.
92 Cf. e.g., Popper [1959], p. 107, footnote *2. Also cf. above,
pp. 180-181.
deduce in the same deductive model-further
consequences from the basic statement either with
the help of the theory under test or some other
theory which we regard as unproblematic. Al-
though this procedure "has no natural end," we
always come to a point when there is no further
disagreement. 93
But when the theoretician appeals against the
verdict of the experimentalist, the appeal court
does not normally cross-question the basic state-
ment directly but rather questions the interpreta-
tive theory in the light of which its truth-value had
been established.
One typical example of a series of successful
appeals is the Proutians' fight against unfavourable
experimental evidence from 1815 to 1911. For
decades Prout's theory T ("that all atoms are com-
pounds of hydrogen atoms and thus 'atomic
weights' of all chemical elements must be express-
ible as whole numbers") and falsifying "observa-
tional" hypotheses, like Stas's "refutation" R ("the
atomic weight of chlorine is 35.5") confronted
each other. As we know, in the end T prevailed
over R.94
The first stage of any serious criticism of a sci-
entific theory is to reconstruct, improve, its logical
deductive articulation. Let us do this in the case of
Prout's theory vis à vis Stas's refutation. First of all,
we have to realize that in the formulation we just
quoted, T and R were not inconsistent (Physicists
rarely articulate their theories sufficiently to be
pinned down and caught by the critic.) In order to
show them up as inconsistent we have to put them
in the following form. T: "the atomic weight of all
pure (homogeneous) chemical elements are multi-
ples of the atomic weight of hydrogen," and R:
"chlorine is a pure (homogeneous) chemical ele-
ment and its atomic weight is 35.5." The last state-
ment is in the form of a falsifying hypothesis
93 This is argued in Popper (1934), Section 29.
94 Agassi claims that this example shows that we may "stick to
the hypothesis in the face of known facts in the hope that the
facts will adjust themselves to theory rather than the other way
round" [1966], p. 18). But how can facts "adjust themselves"?
Under which particular conditions should the theory win?
Agassi gives no answer.
Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes
which, if well corroborated, would allow us to use
basic statements of the form B: "Chlorine X is a
pure (homogeneous) chemical element and its
atomic weight is 35.5"-where X is the proper
name of a "piece" of chlorine determined, say, by
its space-time co-ordinates.
But how well-corroborated is R? The first com-
ponent of it says that $R_{1}$ "Chlorine X is a pure
chemical element." This was the verdict of the
experimental chemist after a rigorous application
of the "experimental techniques" of the day.
Let us have a closer look at the fine-structure of
$R_{1}$. In fact $R_{1}$ stands for a conjunction of two
longer statements, $T_{1}$ and $T_{2}$ The first statement,
$T_{1j}$ could be this: "If seventeen chemical purifying
procedures $P_{1},P_{2}...P_{17}$ are applied to a gas,
what remains will be pure chlorine." $T_{2}$ is then:
"X was subjected to the seventeen procedures $P_{1}$
$P_{2}...P_{17}$ ." The careful "experimenter" care-
fully applied all seventeen procedures: $T_{2}$ is to be
accepted. But the conclusion that therefore what
remained must be pure chlorine is a "hard fact"
only in virtue of $T_{1}$. The experimentalist, while
testing T, applied $T_{1}$. He interpreted what he saw
in the light of $T_{1}$: The result was $R_{1}$. Yet in the
monotheoretical model of the explanatory theory
under test this interpretative theory does not ap-
pear at all.
But what if $T_{1}$, the interpretative theory, is
false? Why not "apply" T rather than $T_{1}$ and claim
that atomic weights must be whole numbers? Then
this will be a "hard fact" in the light of T, and $T_{1}$
will be overthrown. Perhaps additional new puri-
fying procedures must be invented and applied.
The problem is then not when we should stick
to a "theory" in the face of "known facts" and
when the other way round. The problem is not
what to do when "theories" clash with "facts."
Such a "clash" is only suggested by the
"monotheoretical deductive model." Whether a
proposition is a "fact" or a "theory" in the context
of a test-situation depends on our methodological
decision. "Empirical basis of a theory" is a mono-
theoretical notion, it is relative to some mono-
theoretical deductive structure. We may use it as
first approximation; but in case of "appeal" by the
theoretician, we must use a pluralistic model. In
189
the pluralistic model the clash is not "between
theories and facts" but between two high-level
theories: between an interpretative theory to pro-
vide the facts and an explanatory theory to explain
them; and the interpretative theory may be on
quite as high a level as the explanatory theory. The
clash is then not any more between a logically
higher-level theory and a lower-level falsifying hy-
pothesis. The problem should not be put in terms
of whether a "refutation" is real or not. The prob-
lem is how to repair an inconsistency between the
"explanatory theory" under test and the explicit
or hidden-"interpretative" theories; or, if you
wish, the problem is which theory to consider as
the interpretative one which provides the "hard"
facts and which the explanatory one which "tenta-
tively" explains them. In a mono-theoretical
model we regard the higher-level theory as an ex-
planatory theory to be judged by the "facts" deliv-
ered from outside (by the authoritative experimen-
talist): In the case of a clash we reject the
explanation. 95 In a pluralistic model we may de-
cide, alternatively, to regard the higher-level the-
ory as an interpretative theory to judge the "facts"
delivered from outside: In case of a clash we may
reject the "facts" as "monsters." In a pluralistic
model of testing, several theories-more or less
deductively organized are soldered together.
This argument alone would be enough to
show the correctness of the conclusion, which
we drew from a different earlier argument, that ex-
periments do not simply overthrow theories,
that no theory forbids a state of affairs specifia-
ble in advance.9% It is not that we propose a
theory and Nature may shout No; rather, we pro-
pose a maze of theories, and Nature may shout
INCONSISTENT.
The problem is then shifted from the old prob-
95 The decision to use some monotheoretical model is clearly
vital for the naive falsificationist to enable him to reject a theory
on the sole ground of experimental evidence. It is in line with
the necessity for him to divide sharply, at least in a test-situation,
the body of science into two: the problematic and the unprob-
lematic. (Cf. above p. 178-179) It is only the theory he decides
to regard as problematic which he articulates in his deductive
model of criticism.
% Cf. above, p. 174.
190
Part 3 The Validation of Scientific Knowledge
lem of replacing a theory refuted by "facts" to the
new problem of how to resolve inconsistencies
between closely associated theories. Which of the
mutually inconsistent theories should be elimi-
nated? The sophisticated falsificationist can an-
swer that question easily: One has to try to re-
place first one, then the other, then possibly both,
and opt for that new set-up which provides the
biggest increase in corroborated content, which
provides the most progressive problemshift. 97
Thus we have established an appeal procedure
in case the theoretician wishes to question the
negative verdict of the experimentalist. The theo-
retician may demand that the experimentalist
specify his "interpretative theory, "98 and he may
then replace it to the experimentalist's annoy-
ance-by a better one in the light of which his
originally "refuted" theory may receive positive
appraisal. 99
But even this appeal procedure cannot do
more than postpone the conventional decision.
For the verdict of the appeal court is not infallible
either. When we decide whether it is the replace-
ment of the "interpretative" or of the "explana-
tory" theory that produces novel facts, we again
97 For instance, in our earlier example (cf. above, p. 178 ff.)
some may try to replace the gravitational theory with a new one
and others may try to replace the radio-optics by a new one: We
choose the way which offers the more spectacular growth, the
more progressive problemshift.
98 Criticism does not assume a fully articulated deductive struc-
ture: It creates it. (Incidentally, this is the main message of my
[1963-4j.)
99 A classical example of this pattern is Newton's relation to
Flamsteed, the first Astronomer Royal. For instance, Newton
visited Flamsteed on 1 September 1694, when working full time
on his lunar theory; told him to reinterpret some of his data
since they contradicted his own theory; and he explained to
him exactly how to do it. Flamsteed obeyed Newton and wrote
to him on 7 October: "Since you went home, I examined the
observations I employed for determining the greatest equations
of the earth's orbit, and considering the moon's places at the
times. I find that (if, as you intimate, the earth inclines on
that side the moon that is) you may abate abt 20" from
itv.
"Thus Newton constantly criticized and corrected
Flamsteed's observational theories. Newton taught Flamsteed,
for instance, a better theory of the refractive power of the atmo-
sphere; Flamsteed accepted this and corrected his original
"data." One can understand the constant humiliation and
slowly increasing fury of this great observer, having his data
criticized and improved by a man who, on his own confession,
made no observations himself: It was this feeling-I suspect-
which led finally to a vicious personal controversy.
must take a decision about the acceptance or re-
jection of basic statements. But then we have only
postponed and possibly improved the deci-
sion, not avoided it. 100 The difficulties concerning
the empirical basis which confronted "naive"
falsificationism cannot be avoided by "sophisti-
cated" falsificationism either. Even if we regard a
theory as "factual," that is, if our slow-moving
and limited imagination cannot offer an alterna-
tive to it (as Feyerabend used to put it), we have to
make, at least occasionally and temporarily, deci-
sions about its truth-value. Even then, experience
still remains, in an important sense, the "impartial
arbiter"101 of scientific controversy. We cannot get
rid of the problem of the "empirical basis," if we
want to learn from experience 102: but we can
make our learning less dogmatic-but also less
fast and less dramatic. By regarding some observa-
tional theories as problematic we may make our
methodology more flexible: but we cannot articu-
late and include all "background knowledge" (or
"background ignorance"?) into our critical deduc-
tive model. This process is bound to be piecemeal
and some conventional line must be drawn at any
given time.
There is one objection even to the sophisti-
cated version of methodological falsificationism
which cannot be answered without some conces-
sion to Duhemian "simplicism." The objection is
the so-called "tacking paradox." According to our
definitions, adding to a theory completely discon-
nected low-level hypotheses may constitute a
"progressive shift." It is difficult to eliminate such
makeshift shifts without demanding that "the addi-
tional assertions must be connected with the con-
tradicting assertion more intimately than by mere
conjunction."103 This, of course, is a sort of sim-
100 The same applies to the third type of decision. If we reject a
stochastic hypothesis only for one which, in our sense, super-
sedes it, the exact form of the "rejection rules" becomes less
important.
101 Popper [1945), Vol. II, Chapter 23, p. 218.
102 Agassi is then wrong in his thesis that "observation reports
may be accepted as false and hence the problem of the empiri-
cal basis is thereby disposed of" (Agassi [1966 , p. 20).
103 Feyerabend (1965), p. 226.
Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes 191
plicity requirement which would assure the conti-
nuity in the series of theories which can be said to
constitute one problemshift.
This leads us to further problems. For one of
the crucial features of sophisticated falsifica-
tionism is that it replaces the concept of theory as
the basic concept of the logic of discovery by the
concept of series of theories. It is a succession of
theories and not one given theory which is ap-
praised as scientific or pseudo-scientific. But the
members of such series of theories are usually
connected by a remarkable continuity which
welds them into research programmes. This conti-
nuity-reminiscent of Kuhnian "normal sci-
ence"-plays a vital role in the history of science;
the main problems of the logic of discovery cannot
be satisfactorily discussed except in the framework
of a methodology of research programmes.
A METHODOLOGY OF SCIENTIFIC
RESEARCH PROGRAMMES
I have discussed the problem of objective ap-
praisal of scientific growth in terms of progressive
and degenerating problemshifts in series of scien-
tific theories. The most important such series in
the growth of science are characterized by a cer-
tain continuity which connects their members.
This continuity evolves from a genuine research
programme adumbrated at the start. 104 The pro-
gramme consists of methodological rules: Some
tell us what paths of research to avoid (negative
heuristic), and others what paths to pursue (posi-
tive heuristic).
Even science as a whole can be regarded as a
huge research programme with Popper's supreme
heuristic rule: "Devise conjectures which have
more empirical content than their predecessors."
Such methodological rules may be formulated, as
104 One may point out that the negative and positive heuristic
gives a rough (implicit) definition of the "conceptual frame-
work" (and consequently of the language). The recognition that
the history of science is the history of research programmes
rather than of theories may therefore be seen as a partial vindi-
cation of the view that the history of science is the history of
conceptual frameworks or of scientific languages.
Popper pointed out, as metaphysical principles. 105
For instance, the universal anticonventionalist rule
against exception-barring may be stated as the
metaphysical principle: "Nature does not allow
exceptions." This is why Watkins called such
rules "influential metaphysics. "106
But what I have primarily in mind is not sci-
ence as a whole, but rather particular research
programmes, such as the one known as "Cartesian
metaphysics." Cartesian metaphysics, that is, the
mechanistic theory of the universe-according to
which the universe is a huge clockwork (and sys-
tem of vortices) with push as the only cause of
motion-functioned as a powerful heuristic prin-
ciple. It discouraged work on scientific theories-
like (the "essentialist" version of] Newton's theory
of action at a distance-which were inconsistent
with it (negative heuristic). On the other hand, it
encouraged work on auxiliary hypotheses which
might have saved it from apparent counterevi-
dence-like Keplerian ellipses (positive heuris-
tic). 107
Negative Heuristic: The "Hard Core" of
the Programme.
All scientific research programmes may be
characterized by their "hard core." The negative
heuristic of the programme forbids us to direct the
modus tollens at this "hard core." Instead, we
must use our ingenuity to articulate or even invent
"auxiliary hypotheses," which form a protective
belt around this core, and we must redirect the
modus tollens to these. It is this protective belt of
auxiliary hypotheses which has to bear the brunt
of tests and get adjusted and re-adjusted, or even
completely replaced, to defend the thus-hardened
core. A research programme is successful if all this
leads to a progressive problemshift, unsuccessful if
it leads to a degenerating problemshift.
105 Popper [1934), Sections II and 70. I use "metaphysical" as a
technical term of naive falsificationism: A contingent proposi-
tion is "metaphysical" if it has no "potential falsifiers."
106 Watkins [1958].
107 For this Cartesian research programme, cf. Popper [1958]
and Watkins [1958], pp. 350-1.
192
Part 3 The Validation of Scientific Knowledge
The classical example of a successful research
programme is Newton's gravitational theory, pos-
sibly the most successful research programme
ever. When it was first produced, it was sub-
merged in an ocean of "anomalies" (or, if you
wish, "counterexamples 108), and opposed by the
observational theories supporting these anoma-
lies. But Newtonians turned, with brilliant tenacity
and ingenuity, one counter-instance after another
into corroborating instances, primarily by over-
throwing the original observational theories in the
light of which this "contrary evidence" was es-
tablished. In the process they themselves pro-
duced new counter-examples which they again
resolved. They "turned each new difficulty into a
new victory of their programme."109
In Newton's program the negative heuristic
bids us to divert the modus tollens from Newton's
three laws of dynamics and his law of gravitation.
This "core" is "irrefutable" by the methodological
decision of its protagonists: Anomalies must lead
to changes only in the "protective" belt of auxil-
iary, "observational" hypotheses and initial con-
ditions. 110
I have given a contrived micro-example of a
progressive Newtonian problemshift. If we
analyse it, it turns out that each successive link in
this exercise predicts some new fact; each step
represents an increase in empirical content: The
example constitutes a consistently progressive the-
oretical shift. Also, each prediction is in the end
verified; although on three subsequent occasions
they may have seemed momentarily to be "re-
futed. "112 While "theoretical progress" (in the
sense here described) may be verified immediately
, "empirical progress" cannot, and in a re-
search programme we may be frustrated by a long
108 For the clarification of the concepts of "counterexample"
and "anomaly" cf. above, p. 180.
109 Laplace (1796), Livre IV, Chapter ii.
110 The actual hard core of a programme does not actually
emerge fully armed like Athene from the head of Zeus. It de-
velops slowly, by a long, preliminary process of trial and error.
In this paper this process is not discussed.
111 Cl. above, pp. 174-175. For real examples, cf. my [1970].
112 The "refutation" was each time successfully diverted to
"hidden lemmas"; that is, to lemmas emerging, as it were, from
the ceteris paribus clause.
series of "refutations" before ingenious and lucky
content-increasing auxiliary hypotheses turn a
chain of defeats-with hindsight into a resound-
ing success story, either by revising some false
"facts" or by adding novel auxiliary hypotheses.
We may then say that we must require that each
step of a research programme be consistently con-
tent-increasing: that each step constitute a consist-
ently progressive theoretical problemshift. All we
need in addition to this is that at least every now
and then the increase in content should be seen to
be retrospectively corroborated: The programme
as a whole should also display an intermittently
progressive empirical shift. We do not demand
that each step produce immediately an observed
new fact. Our term intermittently gives sufficient
rational scope for dogmatic adherence to a pro-
gramme in face of prima facie "refutations."
The idea of "negative heuristic" of a scientific
research programme rationalizes classical con-
ventionalism to a considerable extent. We may
rationally decide not to allow "refutations" to
transmit falsity to the hard core as long as the cor-
roborated empirical content of the protecting belt
of auxiliary hypotheses increases. But our ap-
proach differs from Poincaré's justificationist con-
ventionalism in the sense that, unlike Poincaré's,
we maintain that if and when the programme
ceases to anticipate novel facts, its hard core
might have to be abandoned: that is, our hard
core, unlike Poincaré's, may crumble under cer-
tain conditions. In this sense we side with Duhem
who thought that such a possibility must be al-
lowed for; 113 but for Duhem the reason for such
crumbling is purely aesthetic, 114 while for us it is
mainly logical and empirical.
Positive Heuristic: The Construction of the
"Protective Belt" and the Relative Autonomy
of Theoretical Science.
Research programmes, besides their negative heu-
ristic, are also characterized by their positive heu-
ristic.
Cf. above, p. 177.
114 Ibid.
Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes
Even the most rapidly and consistently pro-
gressive research programmes can digest their
"counter-evidence" only piecemeal: Anomalies
are never completely exhausted. But it should not
be thought that yet unexplained anomalies-
"puzzles" as Kuhn might call them are taken in
random order, and the protective belt built up in
an eclectic fashion, without any preconceived or-
der. The order is usually decided in the theoreti-
cian's cabinet, independently of the known anom-
alies. Few theoretical scientists engaged in a
research programme pay undue attention to "refu-
tations." They have a long-term research policy
which anticipates these refutations. This research
policy, or order of research, is set out-in more or
less detail in the positive heuristic of the re-
search programme. The negative heuristic speci-
fies the "hard core" of the programme which is
"irrefutable" by the methodological decision of its
protagonists; the positive heuristic consists of a
partially articulated set of suggestions or hints on
how to change, develop the "refutable variants"
of the research programme, how to modify, so-
phisticate, the "refutable" protective belt.
The positive heuristic of the programme saves
the scientist from becoming confused by the
ocean of anomalies. The positive heuristic sets out
a programme which lists a chain of ever more
complicated models simulating reality: The scien-
tist's attention is riveted on building his models
following instructions which are laid down in the
positive part of his programme. He ignores the
actual counterexamples, the available "data."115
Newton first worked out his programme for a
planetary system with a fixed point-like sun and
one single point-like planet. It was in this model
that he derived his inverse square law for Kepler's
ellipse. But this model was forbidden by Newton's
own third law of dynamics; therefore, the model
had to be replaced by one in which both sun and
planet revolved round their common centre of
115 If a scientist (or mathematician) has a positive heuristic, he
refuses to be drawn into observation. He will "lie down on his
couch, shut his eyes and forget about the data." (Cf. my  1963-
4], especially pp. 300 ff., where there is a detailed case study of
such a programme.) Occasionally, of course, he will ask Nature
a shrewd question: he will then be encouraged by Nature's YES,
but not discouraged by its NO.
193
gravity. This change was not motivated by any
observation (the data did not suggest an "anom-
aly" here) but by a theoretical difficulty in devel-
oping the programme. Then he worked out the
programme for more planets as if there were only
heliocentric but no interplanetary forces. Then he
worked out the case where the sun and planets
were not mass-points but mass-balls. Again, for
this change he did not need the observation of an
anomaly; infinite density was forbidden by an (in-
articulated) touchstone theory, therefore planets
had to be extended. This change involved consid-
erable mathematical difficulties, held up New-
ton's work-and delayed the publication of the
Principia by more than a decade. Having solved
this "puzzle," he started work on spinning balls
and their wobbles. Then he admitted interplane-
tary forces and started work on perturbations. At
this point he started to look more anxiously at the
facts. Many of them were beautifully explained
(qualitatively) by this model, many were not. It
was then that he started to work on bulging plan-
ets, rather than round planets, etc.
Newton despised people who, like Hooke,
stumbled on a first naive model but did not have
the tenacity and ability to develop it into a re-
search programme, and who thought that a first
version, a mere aside, constituted a "discovery."
He held up publication until his programme had
achieved a remarkable progressive shift. 116
Most, if not all, Newtonian "puzzles," leading
to a series of new variants superseding each other,
were foreseeable at the time of Newton's first na-
ive model and no doubt Newton and his col-
leagues did foresee them: Newton must have been
116 Reichenbach, following Cajori, gives a different explanation
ajori, gives a
of what delayed Newton in the publication of his Principia: ipia: "To
his disappointment he found that the observational results dis-
agreed with his calculations. Rather than set any theory, how-
ever beautiful, before the facts, Newton put the manuscript of
his theory into his drawer. Some twenty years later, after new
measurements of the circumference of the earth had been made
by a French expedition, Newton saw that the figures on which
he had based his test were false and that the improved figures
agreed with his theoretical calculation. It was only after this test
that he published his law. The story of Newton is one of
the most striking illustrations of the method of modern science"
(Reichenbach [1951], pp. 101-2). Feyerabend criticizes Rei-
chenbach's account (Feyerabend (1965), p. 229), but does not
give an alternative rationale.
194
Part 3 The Validation of Scientific Knowledge
fully aware of the blatant falsity of his first vari-
ants. 117 Nothing shows the existence of a positive
heuristic of a research programme clearer than this
fact: This is why one speaks of "models" in re-
search programmes. A "model" is a set of initial
conditions (possibly together with some of the ob-
servational theories) which one knows is bound to
be replaced during the further development of the
programme, and one even knows, more or less,
how. This shows once more how irrelevant "refu-
tations" of any specific variant are in a research
programme: Their existence is fully expected, the
positive heuristic is there as the strategy both for
predicting (producing) and digesting them. In-
deed, if the positive heuristic is clearly spelt out,
the difficulties of the programme are mathematical
rather than empirical. 118
One may formulate the "positive heuristic" of
a research programme as a "metaphysical" princi-
ple. For instance, one may formulate Newton's
programme like this: "The planets are essentially
gravitating spinning-tops of roughly spherical
shape." This idea was never rigidly maintained:
The planets are not just gravitational, they have
also, for example, electromagnetic characteristics
which may influence their motion. Positive heuris-
tic is thus in general more flexible than negative
heuristic. Moreover, it occasionally happens that
when a research programme gets into a degenerat-
ing phase, a little revolution or a creative shift in
its positive heuristic may push it forward again. 119
It is better therefore to separate the "hard core"
from the more flexible metaphysical principles ex-
pressing the positive heuristic.
Our considerations show that the positive heu-
ristic forges ahead with almost complete disregard
of "refutations": It may seem that it is the "verifi-
cations"120 rather than the refutations which pro-
117 For a further discussion of Newton's research programme,
cf. my [1970].
118 For this point cf. Truesdell [1960].
119 Soddy's contribution to Prout's programme or Pauli's to
Bohr's (old quantum theory) programme are typical examples of
such creative shifts.
120 A "verification" is a corroboration of excess content in the
expanding programme. But, of course, a "verification" does not
verify a programme: It shows only its heuristic power.
vide the contact points with reality. Although one
must point out that any "verification" of the $n+1-$
th version of the programme is a refutation of the
nth version, we cannot deny that some defeats of
the subsequent versions are always foreseen: It is
the "verifications" which keep the programme go-
ing, recalcitrant instances notwithstanding.
We may appraise research programmes, even
after their "elimination," for their heuristic power:
How many new facts did they produce, how great
was "their capacity to explain their refutations in
the course of their growth"?121
(We may also appraise them for the stimulus
they gave to mathematics. The real difficulties for
the theoretical scientist arise rather from the math-
ematical difficulties of the programme than from
anomalies. The greatness of the Newtonian pro-
gramme comes partly from the development-by
Newtonians-of classical infinitesimal analysis
which was a crucial precondition of its success.)
Thus the methodology of scientific research
programmes accounts for the relative autonomy of
theoretical science: a historical fact whose ration-
ality cannot be explained by the earlier falsifica-
tionists. Which problems scientists working in
powerful research programmes rationally choose
is determined by the positive heuristic of the pro-
gramme rather than by psychologically worrying
(or technologically urgent) anomalies. The anom-
alies are listed but shoved aside in the hope that
they will turn, in due course, into corroborations
of the programme. Only those scientists have to
rivet their attention on anomalies who are either
engaged in trial-and-error exercises .. or who
work in a degenerating phase of a research pro-
gramme when the positive heuristic ran out of
steam. (All this, of course, must sound repugnant
to naive falsificationists who hold that once a the-
ory is "refuted" by experiment (by their rule
book), it is irrational (and dishonest) to develop it
further: One has to replace the old "refuted" the-
ory by a new, unrefuted one.)
121 Cf. my [1963-4), pp. 324-30. Unfortunately in 1963-4 1
had not yet made a clear terminological distinction between
theories and research programmes, and this impaired my expo-
sition of a research programme in informal, quasi-empirical
mathematics. There are fewer such shortcomings in my [1971]
REFERENCES
Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes
Agassi [1959]: "How are Facts Discovered?" Impulse,
3, No. 10, pp. 2-4.
Agassi [1966]: "Sensationalism," Mind, N.S. 75, pp. 1-
24.
Agassi [1968]: "The Novelty of Popper's Philosophy of
Science." International Philosophical Quarterly. 8,
pp. 442-63.
Agassi [1969]: "Popper on Learning from Experience,
in Rescher (ed.): Studies in the Philosophy of Science.
1969.
Braithwaite [1938]: "The Relevance of Psychology to
Logic," Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volumes,
17, pp. 19-41.
Braithwaite [1953]: Scientific Explanation, 1953.
Dryer [1906]: History of the Planetary Systems from
Thales to Kepler, 1906.
Duhem [1905]: La Théorie Physique, Son Objet et Sa
Structure, 1905. English translation of the second
(1914) edition: The Aim and Structure of Physical
Theory, 1954.
Einstein [1949]: "Autobiographical Notes," in Schilpp
(ed.): Albert Einstein, Philosopher-Scientist, 1, pp. 2-
95.
Feyerabend [1965]: "Reply to Criticism," in Cohen and
Wartofsky (eds.): Boston Studies in the Philosophy of
Science, II, pp. 223-61.
Feyerabend [1969]: "Problems of Empiricism II," in
Colodny (ed.): The Nature and Function of Scientific
Theory, 1969.
Feyerabend (1970): "Against Method," Minnesota
Studies for the Philosophy of Science. 4, 1970.
Hempel [1952]: "Some Theses on Empirical Certainty,"
The Review of Metaphysics, 5, pp. 620-1.
Keynes [1921]: A Treatise on Probability, 1921.
Koestler [1959]: The Sleepwalkers, 1959.
Lakatos [1962]: "Infinite Regress and the Foundations of
Mathematics," Aristotelian Society Supplementary
Volume, 36, pp. 155-84.
Lakatos (1963-4]: "Proofs and Refutations," The British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 14, pp. 1-25,
120-39, 221-43, 296-342.
Lakatos [1968a]: "Changes in the Problem of Inductive
Logic," in Lakatos (ed.): The Problem of Inductive
Logic, 1968, pp. 315-417.
Lakatos [1968b : "Criticism and the Methodology of
Scientific Research Programmes," in Proceedings of
the Aristotelian Society, 69, pp. 149-86.
Lakatos [1970]: The Changing Logic of Scientific Dis-
covery, 1970.
Lakatos [1971]: Proofs and Refutations and Other Essays
in the Philosophy of Mathematics, 1971.
Laplace [1796]: Exposition du Système du Monde,
1796.
Leibniz [1678]: Letter to Conring, 19.3.1678.
Le Roy [1899]: "Science et Philosophie," Revue de Mé-
195
taphysique et de Morale, 7, pp. 375-425, 503-62,
706-31.
Le Roy [1901]: "Un Positivisme Nouveau," Revue de
Métaphysique et de Morale, 9, pp. 138-53.
Medawar [1967]: The Art of the Soluble, 1967.
Milhaud [1896]: "La Science Rationnelle," Revue de
Métaphysique et de Morale, 4, pp. 280-302.
Mill [1843]: A System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Induc-
tive, Being a Connected View of the Principles of Evi-
dence, and the Methods of Scientific Investigation,
1843.
Musgrave [1969a): Impersonal Knowledge, Ph.D. The-
sis, University of London, 1969.
Musgrave (1969b): Review of Ziman's "Public Knowl-
edge: An Essay Concerning the Social Dimensions of
Science," in The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 20, pp. 92-4.
Neurath [1935]: "Pseudorationalismus der Falsifika-
tion," Erkenntnis, 5, pp. 353-65.
Poincaré [1891]: "Les géométries non euclidiennes,"
Revue des Sciences Pures et Appliquées, 2, pp. 769-
74.
Poincaré [1902 : La Science et l'Hypothèse, 1902.
Popper [1933]: "Ein Kriterium des empirischen Charak-
ters theoretischer Systeme," Erkenntnis, 3, pp. 426-
7.
Popper [1934]: Logik der Forschung, 1935 (expanded
English edition: Popper  1959]).
Popper [1935]: "Induktionslogik und Hypothe-
senwahrscheinlichkeit," Erkenntnis, 5, pp. 170-2.
Popper [1945]: The Open Society and its Enemies, I-II,
1945.
Popper [1957]: "The Aim of Science," Ratio, 1, pp. 24-
35.
Popper [1958]: "Philosophy and Physics"; published in
Atti del XII Congresso Internazionale di Filosofia, Vol.
2, 1960, pp. 363-74.
Popper [1959]: The Logic of Scientific Discovery, 1959.
Popper [1963]: Conjectures and Refutations, 1963.
Popper [1968]: "Remarks on the Problems of Demarca-
tion and Rationality," in Lakatos and Musgrave (eds.):
Problems in the Philosophy of Science, 1968, pp. 88-
102.
Reichenbach [1951]: The Rise of Scientific Philosophy,
1951.
Russell [1943]: "Reply to Critics," in Schilpp (ed.): The
Philosophy of Bertrand Russell, 1943, pp. 681-741.
Truesdell [1960]: "The Program toward Rediscovering
the Rational Mechanics in the Age of Reason," Ar-
chive of the History of Exact Sciences, 1, pp. 3-36.
Watkins [1957]: "Between Analytic and Empirical,"
Philosophy, 32, pp. 112-31.
Watkins [1958]: "Influential and Confirmable Metaphy-
sics," Mind, N.S. 67, pp. 344-65.
Watkins [1960]: "When are Statements Empirical?"
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 10, pp.
287-308.
196
Part 3 The Validation of Scientific Knowledge
Whewell [1837]: History of the Inductive Sciences,
from the Earliest to the Present Time. Three volumes,
1837.
Whewell [1840]: Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences,
Founded upon their History. Two volumes, 1840.
Whewell [1858]: Novum Organon Renovatum. Being
the second part of the philosophy of the inductive
sciences. Third edition, 1858.
Wisdom [1963]: "The Refutability of 'Irrefutable'
Laws," The British Journal for the Philosophy of Sci-
ence, 13, pp. 303-6.