Journal of Econometrics 20 (1982) 3-33. North-Holland Publishing Company




  ON THE FORMULATION                       OF EMPIRICAL MODELS IN DYNAMIC
                                         ECONOMETRICS*


                                          D a v i d F. H E N D R Y
                                 Nuffield College, Oxford, OX1 INF, UK

                                     Jean-Francois RICHARD
                                   C.O.R.E., Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium


Available information is considered as partitioned into the sets: past, present, and future
observations, other data of competing models and theory knowledge. In each case, specific
concepts are relevant to empirical model formulation (e.g. innovations for past data, exogeneity
for present, encompassing for contending models, etc.) and various properties of such concepts
are established (viz. encompassing is transitive and asymmetric). Relationships between concepts
are developed (e.g. encompassing entails variance-dominance in linear models), and related to
the notion of a progressive research strategy. An empirical model illustrates the various criteria.
Model selection by dynamic simulation tracking performance is critically evaluated.



1. Introduction
     N o t w i t h s t a n d i n g the e m p h a s i s on ' M o d e l Building' in econometrics, there
does not seem to exist a formal analysis of ' m o d e l s ' a n d / o r of concepts
relevant to empirical m o d e l s in particular. This p a p e r is offered as a step
t o w a r d s d e v e l o p i n g such an analysis. While it is clearly feasible to u n d e r t a k e
a c o m p l e t e l y formal t r e a t m e n t - - c o r r e s p o n d i n g to that of, say, F l o r e n s a n d
M o u c h a r t (1980a) for the t h e o r y of r e d u c t i o n - - initially it seemed m o s t
useful a n d c o m p r e h e n s i b l e to consider the p r o b l e m m o r e heuristically (and
p r i m a r i l y in the c o n t e x t of linear processes).
    The f r a m e w o r k of the p a p e r is as follows: A v a i l a b l e i n f o r m a t i o n is
conceived of as being p a r t i t i o n e d into the disjoint sets: past, present a n d
future o b s e r v a t i o n s , o t h e r d a t a relevant to c o n t e n d i n g hypotheses, a n d
t h e o r y i n f o r m a t i o n . F o r each item, specific concepts are relevant: viz, 'white
noise' for lagged data, 'exogeneity' for present, ' p a r a m e t e r c o n s t a n c y ' for
   *The authors are greatly indebted to Frank Srba for undertaking the computations reported
below, and to Jean-Pierre Florens, Knud Munk and Aris Spanos for many stimulating
discussions on this topic, but do not hold them responsible for the views expressed herein.
Financial support from the International Centre for Economics and Related Disciplines and
from the Social Science Research Council to the MIME programme at the London School of
Economics is gratefully acknowledged.

0165-7410/82/0000~0000/$02.75                  © 1982 N o r t h - H o l l a n d
4                D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models

 future, and 'encompassing' for contending models are some examples. For
each concept, various properties are established; viz. 'encompassing' is
 asymmetric and transitive and so defines an ordering; and relationships
between concepts are developed (e.g. if Model A has a larger residual
variance than Model B, then it cannot encompass Model B).
   Many widely used concepts arise naturally in the present framework,
although the insufficiency of certain of these as a basis for empirical
modelling does not seem well known. For example, it is inappropriate to
select models by the sole criterion that they have white-noise residuals (or
that combined with a parsimony condition) as this does not necessarily
preclude better fitting models being developed from the same basic
information. Indeed, these could even be more parsimonious than the initial
model if the model-building strategy does not ensure that the white-noise
process is in addition an innovation process relative to the available
information. Similarly, simply selecting 'best fitting' models (again with or
without parsimony conditions) does not by itself ensure encompassing.
Perhaps less well known, and yet of great practical importance, selecting
models by the goodness of their 'dynamic simulation tracking performance' is
invalid in general and tells more about the structure of the models than
about their correspondence to 'reality'.
   It must be stressed that the purpose of the paper is the formulation and
preliminary analysis of a number of concepts relevant to the empirical
econometric analysis of time-series observations. In such a framework,
economic theory plays a relatively neutral role in the sense that the concepts
apply irrespective of the models being based on inadequate (or naive)
theories or on sophisticated, general and/or well-established theories [see e.g.
the approach in Sargent (1981)]. The relationship between theory models and
empirical models is discussed in section 2, followed by an empirical
illustration chosen to 'set the scene' for the analysis of section 4 in which the
main concepts and their inter-relationships are discussed. The empirical
example is reconsidered in section 5, and section 6 evaluates the role of
dynamic simulation in model selection. Concluding comments are provided
in section 7.


2. Theory models and empirical models
  A model of any set of phenomena is a formal representation thereof in
which certain features are abstracted while others are ignored with the intent
of providing a simpler description of the salient aspects of the chosen
phenomena: 'A model always represents only some but not all the features of
the original' [Hayek (1963, p. 14)]. Models comprise sets of structures each
of which is a well-defined characterisation of that which is to be explained.
Two classes of model are important: theory models and empirical models.
                 D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models         5

Despite their common aim of seeking an 'accurate' representation of
perceived 'reality' and their close interdependence in practice, it is essential to
maintain a clear distinction between the two classes in what follows.
   Theory models consist of the logically valid implications of sets of initial
assertions and qualifying conditions (i.e., ceteris paribus clauses) so that in
principle, they are 'free creations of the human mind' [see e.g. Einstein
(1950)]. Succinctly, theory models postulate theory relationships between
latent variables which are defined in the context of the theory using theory
connectives such as 'causal dependence' [see e.g. Simon (1953)] and
contextual concepts such as 'equilibrium' [see e.g. Spanos (1981)]. The
empirical relevance or otherwise of the theory follows from the
correspondence conditions (or measurement equations) mapping latent on to
observable variables Esee e.g. Losee (1980)]. However, since any given theory
may not correctly and completely characterise the perceived world, the
perceptibility of necessary connections among observed events is open to
doubt Efollowing Hume (1958)]. Consequently, the unqualified term
'causality' will refer below only to an asymmetric relationship defined in the
context of a theory model [for recent discussions of 'causality' in
econometrics see inter alia Zellner (1979), Granger (1980a) and Florens and
Mouchart (1981)]. Of course a major function of any economic theory model
in econometrics is to sustain inferences from observed 'empirical regularities'
to conjectured 'causal dependencies'. In modern treatments, the anticipated
presence or absence of certain data correlations is deduced from the causal
structure of the theory model, and the outcome used to 'corroborate or
refute' the theory model. This obviates the need to try and infer 'causes from
correlations', but only by focussing attention on the problem of 'testing'
theory models.
   Most theories form part of a sequence of formulations all of which are
conditional on the empirical validity of many lower level theories (even if this
is usually left implicit in our procedures) and are testable, if at all, only in
conjunction with such theories, the ceteris paribus clauses and a particular
model implementation. If observed data and theory implications are
inconsistent, there is both latitude concerning to which features the
inconsistency is attributed, and ample scope for introducing ad hoc
assumptions to neutralise any anomalies [-see Lakatos (1974)]. However, an
agglomeration of test failures against a background of well-established lower-
level theories may lead to the discarding of the sequence of theories in
question as 'degenerating' in favour of less suspect alternatives (when such
exist) until such time as that theory sequence can account successfully for
previous anomalies. Generally, this last step will require explanations to have
excess empirical content, some of which is corroborated. Blaug (1980)
provides an excellent discussion of such issues in economics using Lakatos's
concept of Scientific Research Programmes [-see Worrall and Currie (1978)].
6               D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis oJ'models

 Since this last notion evolved precisely because of the impossibility of
 'proving' theories combined with the enormous difficulties of 'refuting' them,
 a primary construct used below is that of a 'progressive' research programme
 in which novel 'facts' are anticipated by the theory sequence and are later
corroborated empirically.
    The process of testing a theory model is generally undertaken via an
empirical model which comprises relationships between measured variables.
However, whereas the former may have been a 'free creation' and although it
delineates the structure of the latter (which will generally use the same names
for the observable counterparts of the latent variables) nevertheless, the use
of observed data creates a fundamental distinction between the two classes
since an empirical model must, by default, be simply a recombination of
whatever process generated the data. Which particular recombination is
obtained depends on the constraints imposed by the theory and the
properties of the underlying data generation process. In a Monte Carlo
context, this analysis is trivially obvious: the data generation process
determines the properties of the data set which determines whatever results
are obtained on estimating any given relationship by a well-specified method.
The implications of this viewpoint for empirical research will be discussed
below, following a brief consideration of the role of statistical-theory models
in econometrics.
   The theory of statistical inference proceeds by postulating various
stochastic processes, deducing implications of their behaviour and using the
resulting analysis to interpret observed outcomes: the archetypal example is a
coin-tossing 'model' as a Bernoulli trial. Being concerned with the logical
study of a hypothetical data generation process (denoted by D G P below) in
statistical theory the maintained theory model is never questioned, and issues
of interest concern whether specific structures are identifiable, how 'best' to
estimate the parameters of such as are etc. As expressed by Malinvaud (1966,
p. 64), inference concerns narrowing the scope of the model in the light of the
data. However, conflating the D G P and the model in empirical research
provides an unsound basis for inference until the model in some sense
adequately characterises the data. The data directly convey information about
the D G P (although we may not know how to interpret that information
without an appropriate theory) and many features of most models are open
to evaluation against the data to investigate how well the model describes
that data. But even in the best formulated instances, the complexity of
economic DGP's and the inherent simplicity of econometric models ensure
that the Axiom of Correct Specification [see Leamer (1978, p. 4)] is not a
sufficient basis for inference. Should that Axiom be valid in any particular
case, the model simply coincides with the D G P and the potential
recombination is an identity mapping, but this seems an unlikely eventuality.
   Many of the concepts and issues described above are most easily clarified
                    D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models    7

by examining an empirical illustration which is deliberately formulated to
highlight the relevant points and is not claimed to represent in any way how
econometricians actually conduct empirical research.


3. An illustration: The repayment of mortgage principal
   The theory model is a static-equilibrium world in which all stocks and
flows are constant so that in every period a constant proportion (j¢--1) of
the outstanding stock of mortgage loans ( ~ ) is repaid each period (~'),

         ~=~        '~.                                                        (1)

Note that the repayment profile for any individual loan is nonetheless
nonlinear and dependent on the rate of interest (J) even in such a world.
Also, (1) is typical of many theory models in economics - - it seems logically
correct given the assumptions and provides the useful information that ~ / ~ '
is independent of J/{. Next, script letters denote latent variables defined in a
static-equilibrium context in which (1) holds in both real and nominal terms,
and indeed in various equivalent transformations such as linear-in-logs, first
(or, Yj < or, jth order) differences etc., as stressed below. Finally, comparing
between equilibria, an increase in J ( causes an increase in ~ (whereas, e.g.,
an increase in repayments dynamically lowers the remaining mortgage stock
ceteris paribus).
   In the United Kingdom, most mortgages have been provided by Building
Societies [see Hendry and Anderson (1977) and Mayes (1979)], and for these
institutions, excellent quarterly time-series data (Rt, Mt) exist with negligibly
small (pure) measurement errors (italic capitals denote the measured
'equivalent' of script variables, lower case denote log~ of the corresponding
capital and A j x t = x t - x , j). However, equivalent theory models do not
necessarily yield equivalent empirical models: let 5( = JV 1, then consider




         ~/~   = yc(~/~)      = yc(~/~)_     ,,


where ~ denotes an appropriate Price Index. Without wishing to belabour
the point, log-linear equivalents exist of each of these, as do variants in (any
order of) differences and so on. Unfortunately, all of these theory consistent
models (and many more possibilities) can have distinctly different empirical
properties in terms of (say) residual variance, heteroscedasticity,
autocorrelation, etc. Since almost no repayments of new loans occur within
8                D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models

one quarter, for quarterly data lagged M seems preferable to current and
logs seem preferable to original units as entailing positivity and a constant
percentage residual variance. This suggests estimating

        rt=ao+axm~_l+St+et,              t=l,...,T,                            (2)
where St denotes three seasonal dummy variables (to allow for known
seasonal activity in the housing market), and ao = - l o g e N and a ~ = l are
anticipated. Parenthetically, equations like (2) have occurred in many large
estimated macro-econometric systems [see e.g. Waelbroeck (1976)] and, since
mt-t is 'predetermined', are usually estimated by ordinary least squares
(OLS) on the auxiliary assumption that et~IN(O, a2). For U.K. data from
1958(i) to 1979(iii) OLS estimation yields

        /t=-3.2+0.97mt_l+St,               Re=0.98, 6=0.097, DW=0.49,
              (0.1) (0,02)                                                     (3)

where the estimated standard errors are given in parentheses, 6 is the
residual standard error, and DW is the Durbin-Watson statistic. Fig. 1
shows the time-series graph of (r t, it).
   Certainly, f i ~ l and ao implies N ~ 6 years (close to the mean time
between household moves in the UK), but DW rejects the assumption of
serial independence in the residuals (so the quoted standard errors are
downward biased), although this is easily 'rectified'. However, while the R z is
'high', it is only 0.33 when (rt-mr-1) is the regressand - - and would be zero
for that variable on seasonally adjusted data! Fig. 2 highlights this lack of fit,
despite being essentially a replot of fig. 1. Granger and Newbold (1974)
would describe (3) as a 'classic' spurious regression (R 2 >DW), so 'refitting' in
first differences to remove the trend and autocorrelation,

       Alft=O.83Almt_l+St,            R2=0.65, 6=0.067, DW=I.80.
             (0.23)                                                            (4)

The null of serially uncorrelated residuals can no longer be rejected against
the alternative of first-order autocorrelation, (4) implements another of the
theory model equivalents, 6 has fallen considerably, and fil is not
'significantly different from unity'. On such criteria, (4) seems to provide an
adequate model.
   Appearances can be deceptive, however: if the error on (4) really were an
autonomous white-noise process, then (rr-mt_l) would be a random walk,
and so could assume any value, rendering (1) a useless theory [see Davidson
et al. (1978)]. Further, DW has been used as a selection criterion and if the
only equations reported are those with D W ~ 2 , it hardly provides useful
                                      D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models                                                                                                                           9


                                                                                                                                                                                                             r/

           - -            Actual                                                                                                                                                             /'~ I
           1     i        Fitted                                                                                                                                                        ,I      V




                                                                                                                                                         /__'t l     ¢




                                                                   i




o~
j 4
         1959              1961             1963                   1966                 1967               ~969                        1971            1973          1975               1977                1979

                                                                                              Fig. I.               r,.


  -33




  _,,


  -3.6
          ,,~;,
          ill     I/' /~ N
          IlL' ',i ,11'
                     II

               t i] I'
                           t~
                            ,s: '/11.';,
         ' (Il l l ; l ~ " I'h  /[I I i '


                                 [I
                                          '

                                            I g/
                                                   '"
                                                             II/
                                                                             '
                                                                            / t~
                                                                                                    , ,,/I I;',l/!t,
                                                                                                   ~' ~', , , JI~lrilI, I,IvN; ill
                                                                                               i ! IAll
                                                                                                   ~,,,ahJ
                                                                                                          I I




                                                                                                                ~1


                                                                                                             i, i i ~'
                                                                                                            ',li
                                                                                                                      II




                                                                                                                           I I
                                                                                                                                         i.' r
                                                                                                                                     'I ill~
                                                                                                                               ~H, A I1~
                                                                                                                                     ,; ;,/~
                                                                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                    " ; /
                                                                                                                                                                    I t5I |
                                                                                                                                                                   I" t  l
                                                                                                                                                                      l,I,
                                                                                                                                                                              "'


  -3.7




           119591            r          I     i          I             i          r       [          I          f          I            I          [    T                i          ]        i          i         i          i
                                 1961             1963                     1965               1967                  1969                    1971            1973             1975                1977                 1979

                                                                                      Fig. 2.            (r,-m,                  1).
10                D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models

 'test' information. Moreover, the claim that the residuals in (4) are white
noise (even if it were true) does not entail that the equation is an 'adequate
description of the data', since, for example, the unit common-factor
assumption in (4) could be invalid and hence either or both r t_ 1 and mt 2
could be significant if added as regressors [see Sargan (1980), Hendry and
Mizon (1978)]. According to (1), we 'know' that at = 1, yet after fitting (4) all
that can be said is that [0.37, 1.29] provides a 95~o confidence interval for at!
    It seems clear that a formal analysis of the various concepts involved in
formulating empirical models, and of their inter-relationships, is necessary in
order to clarify the problems encountered above. Relating back to section 2,
a crucial issue is that some unknown mechanism generated (rt, mt) from
which (2) is a derived representation such that et must contain everything
affecting r t not explicitly included in (2): the assertion that e ~ l N ( O , a 2) is
tantamount to the claim that (2) is the D G P even though (3) immediately
contradicts that by its obvious failure to describe many salient data features.
Thus, (ao, a 0 is a (reduced) reparameterisation of the parameters (0) of the
(unknown) underlying DGP, induced by the method of estimation and so is
defined implicitly by the auxiliary claims that g(er)=0, and g(etmt 1)=0.
The constancy of 0 and the reduction necessary to obtain (2) determine the
constancy (or otherwise) of (rio, rl) as T varies, the properties of the residuals,
and so on [for a general analysis of the theory of reduction - - in a Bayesian
framework - - see Florens and Mouchart (1980a)].
    Relating forward to section 4, issues meriting consideration are the
predictability of white-noise errors, their use as an equation selection
criterion and their relationship to goodness-of-fit, the theory consistency of
empirical models, the validity of data transformations, and so on. We hope
our analysis will allow a useful framework to be developed for formulating
and selecting empirical models which do not coincide 1-1 with the actual
data generation process. Also, while (1) is obviously a very rudimentary
starting point (to highlight specific issues), similar potential difficulties lurk
behind any empirical study, however good its initial theory, the difference
being a matter of degree not of kind.



4. An analysis of empirical-model concepts
   For notational convenience, the mechanism generating the outcome
X~ = (xt... xr) of a k-dimensional time-sequential economic process is assumed
continuous with respect to an appropriate measure as in, e.g., Engle et al.
(1981), and is, therefore, described by the density function
                         T
        D(x lXo, o)= I]                  Oo,                                      f5)
                        t=l
                 D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models        11

where 0 = (0o{0~})e 0     is a finite-dimensional, identifiable, sufficient
parameterisation [see e.g. Madansky (1976, ch. 2)]. Also, 0 o denotes
parameters which are fixed throughout the time horizon T, while 0t regroups
transient parameters [as in, say, Crowder (1976)]. X o is the matrix of initial
conditions and Xt_I=(XoX~_ O. To aid the exposition and simplify proofs,
the analysis is implicitly restricted to the linear framework, although we
conjecture that many of the results apply more generally. If {xt} is assumed to
be strongly mixing and (5) involves a finite lag dependency, then the results
in Domowitz and White (1982) seem to provide an adequate basis for a valid
asymptotic distribution theory for least-squares approximations to a wide
range of models. Below, T is assumed sufficiently large that large sample
theory is applicable.
   The analysis is based on a partition of the available information (described
in section 1 above) into (i) past (or lagged) data, (ii) current data, (iii) future
data, (iv) the separate data of contending hypotheses, and (v) theory
information. This ordering is chosen for analytical convenience so that the
elements of the partition can be considered cumulatively.

(i) Past information
Definition 1. {et} is a (mean) white-noise process if o~(e,[Et_l)=o~(e,), Vt,
where Et_ 1 =(EDEn_ 0. Thus {et} is not predictable linearly from its past [see
Granger (1980b)], beyond its unconditional mean (taken to be zero).

   Note that {et} may be predictable either fully or in part given an extended
information set and indeed may have a temporal structure [see Davidson
and Hendry (1981)]. Also, {et} need not be homoscedastic and in particular
could follow an ARCH scheme [see Engle (1982)]. If ~(et)=O, Vt, given
Definition 1, then {et} is a (vector) martingale difference sequence [see
Whittle 1970, ch. 9)]. Since from any stochastic process with a rational
spectrum a white-noise component can be extracted by an appropriate filter,
having a white-noise residual is a minimal criterion for an empirical model to
satisfy rather than an 'adequate' stopping point in a modelling exercise.
  To minimise repetition, it is convenient to allow for the possibility that
contemporaneous information might be available even though this sub-
section is explicitly concerned only with past data.

Definition 2. (i) {v~} is a mean innovation process (MIP) with respect to an
information set ~ t if ~(vtlF,)=0, Vt; and (ii) {v,} is an innovation process
with respect to ~ t if it is a MIP and D(v, IJ~,)=D(vt), Vt.

  Whether or not {et} is an innovation process critically depends on the
information set under consideration. White noise is certainly a M1P relative
12              D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models

to its own history and if ~ t contains ~//~t 1, then innovations are also white
noise. However, if g t = ( E t 1,~t_1) where ~ t 1 describes the past of an
additional set of variables ~/t, then {e~} is a MIP with respect to ~ t only if ~/
does not Granger-cause e [see Granger (1969), Engle et al. (1981)].
   As an example, let Yt be a subvector of x , let vt=xt-g(xtlY t 1) and let
• (L)vt--nt where ~(L) is a rational polynomial matrix in the lag operator L
such that {et} is vector white noise, then these conditions are not sufficient to
ensure that {et} is a MIP with respect to X t_ 1. Models with invalid common
factors in lag polynomials are an instance of non-innovation white noise.
Thus, for any given time series of data, a multiplicity of empirical models can
be constructed which have disturbances that are not detectably different from
white noise.
   Econometric models typically consist of a hypothetical description of the
(conditional) process generating a subset of the observable variables, say Yr.
Let z, denote the conditioning ('exogenous') observable variables and let wt
consist of all the other variables in xt (whether latent or observable) so that
xt is now partitioned into (wtYtzt). Let St-1 = (Y t-lZt - 1).

Definition 3. (i) A statistical model of {ytlzt;t= 1..... T} is any parametric
stochastic representation {P(yt[zt, St_l,0o,~t); t = l ..... T} where P(') is a
probability density function and 0 = (qto{~Ot}) is the corresponding
parameterisation. (ii) An empirical model of {ytlz,} is any complete numerical
specification of a statistical model thereof.

   When no ambiguity arises, the generic 'model' is used as a shorthand
below for whichever of these two concepts applies. However, the
hypothesised density functions {P(ytlz, St_l,.)} should not be confused with
the genuine data density functions {O(Ytlz, St_l,.)} which they are designed
to mimic. The latter can be derived, conceptually at least, from the DGP(5)
by marginalising with respect to W~ and sequentially conditioning with
respect to {zt} [see Florens and Mouchart (1980a, b), Hendry and Richard
(1981)]. In the linear case, such reductions could be conducted analytically,
as in Engle et al. (1981), so that, e.g., under the Axiom of Correct
Specification, ~ would be an explicit function of 0. More generally, the
properties of the pseudo-partial likelihood function,

                    T
        L(~O;S~)= [~ P(Yt{Zt, St   1,0o,~,),                                  (6)
                   t=l


depend on the underlying DGP, as does the behaviour of estimators of ~p.
Whichever interpretations model-builders accord to ~, such 'parameters' are
de facto those functions of 0 which happen to be consistently estimated by
the 'estimators' that have been selected on the basis of the statistical model
                    D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis oJ'models   13

under consideration [see Hendry (1979), Domowitz and White (1981)].
   Let g and gp denote expectations operators with respect to the density
functions D(-) and P('), respectively. The 'errors', et=yt-Sp(ydzt, S t 1),
receive considerable attention in econometric modelling, and correctly so
since under the Axiom of Correct Specification, {e,} should be a M I P relative
to (z, St-O and even relative to (z, Xt-1) if W~_I does not Granger-cause
(YtZ,). In practice, however, {e,} often is not even white noise. Hence we
define:

Definition 4.    A model is data coherent if the error process {et) is (at least)
white noise.

   Thus, the actual and fitted values differ 'randomly' in a data coherent
model: this is the notion used, e.g., in Davidson et al. (1978). In effect, the A
operator in (4) was an adequate filter for achieving residuals that were not
first-order autocorrelated. However, D W ~ 2 . 0 does not imply that the
residuals are white noise: a 'portmanteau' test for a flat spectrum would be
required to throw light on that issue (i.e., non-rejection achieved by low
power 1 tests is hardly persuasive). Further, white noise need not be a MIP.
Note that one important aspect of working with a model based on a mean
innovation process (even if this is heteroscedastic) is that valid inference
about ~ can proceed on the basis of results in Domowitz and White (1981,
1982) for a useful range of stochastic processes relevant to economics' data.
   Since simply possessing a white-noise error process does not characterise a
unique choice of model, let g(-) denote a (scalar) criterion function defined
on ~¢, the class of models under consideration Efor example, g(,) could
denote the negative of the log-likelikeihood value, or that corrected for the
number of estimated parameters or { - R 2} or a 2 or generalised variance for
a system, etc.]. Then:

Definition 5. The model A~ g-dominates the model A 2 if and only if
g(AO<g(A2) [A1 and A 2 a r e g-equivalent ifg(AO=g(A2) ].
   Variance-dominance is a major selection criterion in actual empirical
research, in part because of the proposition that 'true models' dominate
'false' when the 'model' contains the D G P as a special case [see e.g. Theil
(1971, p. 543), Learner (1978, p. 75)]. It remains to be discussed precisely how
useful variance-dominance is when ,.4 does not contain the DGP.

   It follows from Definition 5 that g-dominance is an asymmetric
relationship and is transitive, both of which are important attributes of a
selection criterion. However, by itself dominance is not necessarily a decisive
criterion since a model based on the union of the regressors of all sub-
  tOr, of course, incorrectly sized.
14                D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models

models (less redundant variables) cannot be variance- or likelihood-
dominated in its class, or as noted by Poirier (1981), a nesting model in a
class of false models has the highest (large sample) posterior odds.
Nevertheless, we state:

Theorem 1. Models without mean innovation error processes can be variance-
dominated by a model with a mean innovation error on the same data.

    This is a well-known result, based on the fact that g(Yt[z~,St-1) is the
minimum mean square error predictor of Yt given (zt, S~_l) and that
~ , = y t - g ( y r l z t , St_l) is a M I P relative to (zt, St-~). Theorem 1 provides a
partial answer to the question raised above about the usefulness of variance-
dominance when ~ does not contain the DGP. Moreover, if the set of
conditioning variables in A1 is a subset of those in A2, then A1 cannot
variance-dominate A2 thus inducing one variant of a progressive research
strategy (see section 2 above). Indeed, this notion appears to lead naturally to
model building strategies which focus (at some stage) on relatively
'unrestricted' models (in terms of choice of regressor variables and lag
lengths) to calibrate the MIP error variance. Parsimony considerations may
then induce a simplification search procedure [on these issues, see Sims
(1980), Leamer (1978), Hendry (1980)]. Thus we have:

Definition 6. The model A is g-parsimonious if dim(qJ)<dim(~91) for all
models Ai which are g-equivalent to A or g-dominated by A.

   Much of the so-called 'model selection' literature (in which model choice is
based on AIC, F P E or Schwartz criteria, etc. [-see Amemiya (1980), Chow
(1981), Sawyer (1982)] is concerned with selecting 'parsimoniously
undominated' models for various choices of g('), usually subject to a
restriction that the residual process be white noise.
   As will be seen below, it is unclear that model selection should emphasise
'parsimonious non-dominance' to the exclusion of other important features
(such as invariance, encompassing, and so on).


(ii) Contemporaneous information
   It is conventional in econometrics to condition analyses on current dated
information and this possibility was allowed for above with models being
conditional on Zr
   The validity of such conditioning for purposes of inference, prediction
and/or policy has long been a subject of debate in econometrics concerning
alternative notions of exogeneity. That important topic is the subject of a
separate recent paper [-see Engle et al. (1981)] and, therefore, will not be re-
                    D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models   15


analysed herein beyond noting that we adopt the definitions and
formulations of those authors. However, in order to make the present paper
essentially self-contained, we briefly restate their definitions of weak and
strong exogeneity as well as in sub-section (iii) below that of super-
exogeneity. Also, since we have already emphasised the distinction between
the D G P and models, it is useful to distinguish explicitly between, say, D-
exogeneity and P-exogeneity depending on whether we are discussing
exogeneity at the level of the D G P (which is typically unknown but
fundamentally determines the empirical findings) or at the level of models
thereof. The definition of D-exogeneity is based on the factorisation


          O(Yt, zt[gt_ 1, .) = O(Ytlzt, St - 1, .)D(z,]S~_ l, .),              (7)


where D(Yt, ztlSt_l,.) is derived from the D G P (5) by marginalising with
respect to W 1.

Definition 7. zt is D-weakly-exogenous for a set of 'parameters of interest' if
these are functions of those of the conditional D G P D(ytlzt, St 1,.) only, the
latter being 'variation-free' with the parameters of the marginal DGP
D(ztlSt_l,.). Also, zt is D-strongly-exogenous if, in addition, y does not
Granger-cause z.

   P-exogeneity is defined in a similar way with reference to a hypothetical
density function P(Yt, Zt[St-1,.) which typically requires 'completing' the
statistical model under consideration by an auxiliary model P(ztlSt_l,.), at
least for the purpose of constructing parametric tests of P-exogeneity.
   D-weak-exogeneity validates conducting inference on any function of the
parameters of the conditional D G P OCvtlzt, St_l,.), possibly including some
parameters of a mis-specified model thereof, without loss of relevant sample
information. However, P-exogeneity is the concept which is de facto the
object of any modelling exercise and, in particular, specification errors
(including errors affecting the auxiliary marginal model for zt) may lead to a
rejection of P-exogeneity even though zt is D-weakly-exogenous.

(iii) Future observations
  This slightly unfortunate terminology is meant to denote that if x t is the
current-dated variable, then {xt+l...} comprises future information (even if
such values are already known).

Definition 8. A statistical model A has constant parameters if (0o, ~9t)= ~ for
t = 1,..., T.
16              D.F. llendry and .I.-F. Richard, Fro'real anal)'si.s t!l'models

   A standard statistic for evaluating parameter constancy is the Chow test
[see Chow (1960)] although there exists a large literature on investigating
potential parameter variations related to the Kalman Filter [for an
exposition, see Harvey (1981)]. The important issue here, however, is that
there is no necessary connection between parameter constancy and the
criteria previously discussed. Since constant parameters are of interest for
most modelling purposes, the inadequacy of (say) 'parsimonious non-
dominance' as the sole selection criterion is clear.
   Note that constancy of the parameters of the D G P entails constancy of the
parameters of statistical models thereof, however mis-specified they may be,
insofar as the latter are functions of the former. However, it is a common
empirical finding that DGP's are subject to interventions affecting some of
their parameters. A typical example is that of control variables which are
subject to policy interventions. A critical issue for prediction or policy
simulation experiments is the constancy of the parameters of the
corresponding conditional D G P (or model thereof) under interventions
affecting the DGP of the control variables.

Definition 9. (i) A statistical model has invariant parameters under a class of
interventions if its parameters remain constant under such interventions. (ii)
zt is D-super-exogenous if it is D-weakly-exogenous and the conditional
model has invariant parameters.

   Parameter invariance is a more demanding requirement than just
constancy since the latter may simply be the result of chance D G P constancy
over the sample period or of invariance with respect to a limited class of
interventions (covering those which occurred over the sample period), while
the former typically requires parameter constancy under hypothetical
interventions and is, therefore, conjectural [see e.g. Lucas (1976), Sargent
(1981)]. However, within sample parameter change is sufficient to reject that
conjecture.
   Finally, to use an invariant empirical model of {y,lzt, S~_l} (where z~ is
weakly exogenous for the parameters of the conditional model) for prediction
of Y~r+~ conditional on Z~r+ 1 requires that zt be strongly exogenous over the
period ] t + l , T ] . Otherwise, an auxiliary empirical model of {z,]S,-1} is
required in order to exploit the feedback of Y, ~ on zt. Likewise, conditional
simulation experiments (on which see section 6 below) require strong
exogeneity.

(iv) Data relevant to contending models
  It is rare in economics to obtain a unanimous view on the precise
determination of any economic variable and usually there is a proliferation
                    D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models                   17


of rival empirical models. In our framework, these all constitute
recombinations of the D G P and hence are not 'independent representations',
a point made in the context of time-series versus econometric models by
Wallis (1977). Thus, while the underlying theory models may be separate or
non-nested, in that none is a special case of any other, the empirical models
are all nested within the DGP. This is manifest on attempting Monte Carlo
analysis of 'non-nested' models - - enough of the D G P must be specified to
generate all of the observables, whence the outcome depends on how the
D G P was constructed (as well as on which separate hypotheses are
postulated).
   If the complete D G P were known (as in the Monte Carlo context since
'real' DGP's may be unknowable), then one could deduce what results would
obtain on estimating a given set of models, irrespective of whether these were
mutually separate or not. Consequently, one can ask of any specific model
whether it mimics this property of the D G P in that it can account for the
results obtained by other models; if so, then the first model is said to be
encompassing.

  Encompassing could be defined at a high level of generality where
contending models may differ by:
(i) their choices of endogenous variables;
(ii) their functional forms;
(iii) their choices of conditioning variables.
  In view of the scope of the present paper, we shall formulate definitions
which cover only (ii) and (iii) and illustrate them with reference to linear
models which differ solely in their choices of 'regressors'.
   Let rlt and r2t be two different subsets of the variables in (zt, Yt 2, Z t - - t )
[-rl~ and rzt may have variables in common, see e.g. Mizon and Richard
(1981, section 4.4), in which case some of the density functions we intro-
duce below are singular and degrees of freedom for test statistics have
to be adjusted conformably]. L e t A l = { P l ( Y t l r l t , ~ l t ) ; t ~ . l . . . . . T} and
A 2 = {P20~tlrzt, I//zt); t = i ..... T} be rival models. It is assumed that the model-
builders had access to a common set of data and, accordingly, that


          Pi(Ytlrit, Oit)--Pi(Ytlzt, Yt-l,Zt      1,Oit),   i=1,2,    t = l ..... T,          (8)

which entails that

          P,(fltlrlt, 0at)-- P,(Ytlrat, r2t, Oxt),                                          (9a)

          P2(Ytlrzt, ~'2t) - Pz(.Yt[rat, r:t, Ozt).                                         (9b)
18                 D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models

Definition 10. A~ least-squares encompasses A 2 if and only if 1~2 t c a n be
derived from 0~t and the least-squares description of the (data) relationship
linking rlt and r2t.

  To link A~ and A 2 essentially requires specifying a set of mutually
compatible auxiliary density functions {Pl(rldrzt,)~t); t = l ..... T} - - and
carrying out the following marginalisation:

         P1Qvtlr2t, I~lt, ~,) ~--~ Pl(Ytlrlt, I~lt)Pl(rlt[r2t, ~t)dr it.           (10)

However, the weaker form of encompassing in Definition 10 only requires
considering least-squares approximations of rlt by r2t.
   Note that the validity of (10) requires that of formula (9a). [If (9a) did not
hold, then A x should first be completed to form a model ofy, conditional on
rl, and r2t. ] Provided Pl(Ytlrzt, lltlt,.~t) a n d PzO~tlrzt,~ltzt) belong to a common
class of parametric density functions, their reconciliation induces a mapping
between parameter spaces, say,


         0zt = h(~,l,, 2),       t = l ..... T.                                   (11)

The application of Definition 10 at the level of empirical models requires
checking whether or not (11) holds for the numerical values under
consideration [see e.g. Davidson and Hendry (1981)]. Alternatively, replacing
the unknown parameters in (11) by appropriate estimators may provide the
basis of an encompassing test statistic, using a Wald formulation. Mizon and
Richard (1981) use another version of encompassing which builds on the
pioneering work of Cox (1961). Let 1if2 t denote the Maximum Likelihood
estimator of 02t (under A2) and let gl(Olt)=6ffp,(l~ztlrl, ) denote the
expectation of q~2t with respect to Y~ under the working assumption that A 1
is the relevant DGP, taking into account (9a).

Definition 11.   AI Cox-encompasses A 2 if and only if

        ~k2,=g~(~O1,),        t= 1..... T.

   It is easily shown that the two versions of encompassing coincide in linear
worlds where the rival models differ only by their choices of regressors and,
furthermore, that in a single-equation framework, the conventional F-test
statistic can be interpreted as an encompassing test statistic [compare section
6 in Hendry and Richard (1981) and section 4.3 in Mizon and Richard
(1981)]. This interpretation offers the advantage that, in contrast to the
conventional Neyman-Pearson framework, the validity of the 'nesting' model
                       D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models      19

based on the union of the two sets of regressors is irrelevant within an
encompassing framework.
  It can also be shown that in linear worlds, encompassing entails variance
dominance. Let 2;, be the covariance matrix of ( y , r~t, rzt). Dropping the *ime
subscript (as irrelevant to the essence of the argument) partition 27
conformably with (y, rl, r2) ,

                ( 2;yy
         27=~x,,Xll )"                                                              02)
                   272Y2;2 1 '~-'22
Let
         Xyy.i~-~.~yy--~-~yi~-~iil~.~iy,           i= 1, 2,

where Y.yy.i is the covariance matrix of the residuals of the least-squares
approximation of y by ri. We can establish the following lemma:

Lemma.       I f "~2y = ~21 "~111 ~'~1y' t h e n   Xyy. 2 > 27yy. 1.
Proof    o*'(27yy. 2 - 2;,. 1)o~
         = ~'(Y, yl Y,~112;1,, - T.~2~.2~Z,2y)~
         -- t        -1
         - ~ (#27y12;~1 2;ly-2;ylY.11- 1 X122;22
                                              --1       -1
                                                  27212711 271y)~

                 --A       t          --~          --&     ±           --±   --&
         =   (I:~ ~ I:~y~) [I - (.~1~ 2;~22722)(I4 ~ 2;2 ~2;11q](2;~ ~ I:~y~)> O.

                                   __
Since the assumption that z~'2y--Z~21~'ll -1 ~rly is the least-squares counterpart
of assumption (9a), the Lemma establishes that, in a least-squares framework,
encompassing entails variance-dominance. Since in addition encompassing is
transitive, the concept is close to that of a 'sufficient model' in a theory of
reduction in that knowing the encompassing model, one can forget about
other models, deriving them as the need arises (compare the notion of
sufficient statistics). If A1 encompasses A 2 when both models are linear least-
squares approximations the converse is false, and if A 2 in turn encompasses
A 3 then A1 encompasses A 3. Thus, encompassing is a central concept in any
progressive research strategy especially in view of the lemma that variance-
dominance is necessary but not sufficient: an encompassing model will
variance-dominate but a variance-dominating model need not encompass.
   Two further consequences follow from this result: firstly, the emphasis on
selecting variance-dominating models is somewhat misplaced and should
follow automatically from a selection procedure which seeks an
encompassing model, rather than being an 'independent' criterion; and
20              D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models

secondly, since Cox-type non-nested hypothesis tests simply test for variance-
encompassing [-see Cox (1961), Mizon and Richard (1981)], if tests of the
dominated model against the dominating do not reject the former, the power
of the test is revealed as low. Other intriguing implications can be derived: let
A1 and A2 be two rival models with claimed constant parameters. If A1
encompasses A 2 and it is known that the relationship of rl~ to rzt has altered
over the sample period (a common occurrence in empirical work), the
modeller knowing Aj can deduce by using (11) over different subperiods
what parameter change A 2 should exhibit (even though neither investigator
has directly tested for such a contingency in A2! ). Similarly for residual
autocorrelation: an encompassing model should allow one to predict the
magnitude of this in contending models, and so on.
   Accounting for all the salient features of rival models may seem at first
sight an overly demanding criterion: strictly speaking the D G P is the only
model that could encompass all its rivals while, at the same time, it is
essentially unknowable given limited sample evidence. It is obvious that any
model, however good an approximation to the DGP, could be rejected
against a rival model expressly designed for that purpose. However, this is a
vacuous exercise if it does not lead to the formulation of 'better' models and
so encompassing seems bound to be an essential component of a progressive
modelling strategy. In particular, in a subject with many separate models all
being advocated as a basis for policy, encompassing seems a reasonable
requirement which remains impressive when obtained from a parsimonious
specification. Clearly, concepts such as minimal encompassing (with minimal
dimension 0) can be developed, and the notion generalised to systems in
which endogenous regressors occur and/or hypotheses differ as to what
variables are weakly or strongly exogenous, etc.

(v) Theory information

   This plays an essential role in econometric analysis and it is doubtful if
one could even define parameters of interest in the absence of an adequately
articulated theory. Indeed, the D G P itself may be dependent on currently
popular economic theory. In certain theories, 0 is highly constrained [as in,
say, rational expectations formulations; see Lucas and Sargent (1982)]. A
weak condition is:

Definition 12. An empirical model is theory consistent if it reproduces the
theory model under the conditions assumed by the theory.

   Lest it be thought that this is vacuous, note that, e.g., in section 2 above,
(4) was not consistent with the static solution (1), from which it was
ostensibly derived. As a further example, changes in assumptions about error
                 D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models        21


autocorrelation can alter the consistency of a model with a given dynamic
behavioural theory [see e.g. Hendry et al. (1981)-1.
  Generally, theories incorporate measurement structures and hence models
need to be consistent with whatever data constraints are automatically
binding (e.g. identities, positivity, lying between zero and unity, etc.):

Definition 13. An empirical model is data admissible if its predictions satisfy
all data constraints with probability unity.

   For example, 0 < ~ / J / ¢ ' < l holds for the variables in section 2, so neither
(3) nor (4) are data admissible. Attempting to specify a functional form which
is data admissible often leads to a model specification in which approximate
normality of the error process is reasonable. Unfortunately, tractability and
admissibility may conflict and/or no function can be found which jointly
satisfies two data constraints (e.g., a linear identity and a positivity
constraint).
   As with admissible estimators, many investigators work with data-
inadmissible models or achieve admissibility by artifact [see Brainard and
Tobin (1968)], usually for convenience or because the probability of violating
constraints is bOieved to be negligible.

(vi) Representing the DGP
Definition 14. A model is a Tentatively Adequate Conditional Data
Characterisation (TACD) if:

(a) it encompasses all rival models;
(b) its error process is a MIP relative to the selected data base;
(c) its parameters of interest .are constant;
(d) it is data admissible;
(e) its current conditioning variables are weakly exogenous for the
    parameters of interest.

   A number of points need to be made about the concept of a TACD.
Firstly, such a model is not claimed to be the DGP, simply to adequately
represent it. Thus, in a Monte Carlo, data generated from the TACD should
reproduce all the investigated features of the original data. This does not
preclude the development of 'better' TACD's using more information, such
that these successively encompass previous results with MIP's having ever
smaller variances. Secondly, we have not included 'theory consistency' as a
criterion because of the well-known rationalisation problem: there always
exists some theory consistent with the observed results unless these are
mutually contradictory [which hopefully (d) excludes]. In any case,
Definition 14 is applicable however naive or sophisticated the initial theory
22                  D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models

may have been. 2 Next, weak-exogeneity assertions often are only indirectly
testable but are partially checked by (a) and (c) holding for worlds in which
some elements of 0 are transients which induce data correlation changes.
Fourthly, a sequence of TACD's would seem to characterise a useful research
strategy, which would be progressive if the theoretical framework enabled
successive improvements to be predicted in advance (rather than as responses
to observed anomalies). Further, we believe it is possible to develop TACD's
and would cite Davidson et al. (1978) as a potential example. In practice,
successively encompassing TACD's also can be generated [see e.g. Davidson
and Hendry (1981)]. Parenthetically, we note that U K Government policy
has been based on a model which uses a version of the Davidson et al.
equation [see H.M. Treasury (1980)] so that on this measure the approach is
of some use. Finally, if the explanatory variables are all strongly exogenous,
Definition 11 can be modified to a tentatively adequate conditional D G P ,
and if the model is closed, to a tentatively adequate D G P [note that (b)
subsumes data coherency].
   Two more related issues remain to be discussed: the use of tests as
selection criteria, and data mining. Concerning the former, a model would
not be advanced as a TACD (by an investigator who intended to develop
such a representation) unless appropriate test-statistic values were obtained.
Thus diagnostic tests employed in model selection are satisfied by design and
do not constitute 'independent checks' on the validity of the model, although
new statistics, later data and/or further rival models can provide genuine
tests in so far as the TACD is hazarded to potential rejection. Next, 'data
mining' has been used in both dismissive and positive senses, but the latter
connotation applies to any methodology aimed at developing TACD's since
such an activity involves 'judgment and purpose' [see Learner (1978, ch. 1)].
The former sense is justified when the modelling is structureless through lack
of either a theory context or a search strategy. But we wish to stress that
despite estimating several variants prior to selecting any specific model,
conditional on its being a TACD, then, e.g., the quoted parameter standard
errors [estimated as in, say, Domowitz and White (1982)] are consistent
estimates of the sampling standard deviations of parameters estimated from
such a DGP. Such conditional statements seem less than convincing if
models are not even TACD's.

(vii) Parameters of" interest
  While a given theory defines what 'parameters' are of general interest,
usually it leaves latitude concerning precisely which features are basic and/or
constant (e.g. propensities or elasticities, etc.). Thus, additional considerations

  ~Naturally, one anticipates that 'better' theories will lead to better TACD's or to more rapid
development of these.
                D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models      23


must be invoked in designing models and 'orthogonality' and 'parsimony'
enter at this stage. By the former is meant a reparameterisation based on
prior considerations such that the associated variables are not highly
intercorrelated;    data-dependent    transformation    (such   as    principal
components) are deliberately excluded from our notion. The parameters
should have clear-cut interpretations [see e.g. Rothenberg (1973)] and near-
orthogonal parameterisations often arise naturally in modelling economic
behaviour [-see Davidson et al. (1978)]. Our practical experience is that such
parameters tend to be robust to changes in both model specification and
data correlations (which of course would follow trivially if 'included' and
'excluded' variables were, and remained, orthogonal).
   The latter topic arises again here [see sub-section (i) above] through its
link with reparameterisations designed to enhance robustness and facilitate
model selection when prior specification is uncertain: it seems a reasonable
objective to try and achieve the maximum of explanation with the minimum
of factors. Indeed, a data-admissible econometric model with a parsimonious
specification of constant, interpretable parameters related to a well-
formulated theory which still succeeded in encompassing alternative
(commensurable) hypotheses must deserve serious consideration in any
scientific research strategy. Later models almost certainly will be developed
which are in turn encompassing and based on 'sounder' theory, but this does
not vitiate adopting the currently best available model. Note that our
analysis does not exclude the possibility that an entire sequence of models is
wholly mis-conceived and after a long progression, is duly replaced by a
(perhaps incommensurable) alternative sequence based on a totally different
conceptual framework (as occurred, e.g., with Cartesian and Newtonian
theories of planetary motion).


5. The empirical illustration reconsidered
   The concepts discussed in section 4 are applicable to the empirical models
in section 3, hut it is readily established empirically that these equations fail
on almost every criterion. Rather than criticise such simple formulations,
however, the purpose of this section is to describe a TACD consistent with
(1) which helps exposit our ideas constructively.
   The underlying theory is one of dynamic adjustment around a steady-state
defined by (1). The model allows for activity changes in the housing market
(most UK mortgages must be repaid on selling the associated house), the
consequentially varying age profile of loans (for actuarial reasons, a larger
percentage is repaid on longer-standing loans), changes in interest rates (total
monthly payments are usually announced so that as I varies the proportion
of repayments may alter), and premature repayments out of deposits
(presumably from balances excess to liquidity requirements).
24                      D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models

     The statistical model is an autoregressive-distributed lag of

               ,        f R]M,_x ]
          q,= log ]-1 - R ~ ] M , - , ;


on A~p,_~, A l l t _ l , dlmt_l, Aldt_ 1 with four lags on each variable, plus
constant, St, mt-~, It-1 and V. A llz_2, where P denotes an index of house
prices and V is a dummy variable equal to unity till 1974(ii) and zero
thereafter, and D denotes Building Society deposits. Thus, the specification is

                   4.
          qt = ~" (ctjqt_ j.-l- fljAlp,_j + 3)jAlI t j q-,~jzIlmt-j-b dPjzltdt- j)
              j=l

               +62It-l +7oV'Allt             2 + S t + ( ) o + ( ~ l m t - l +e t,   (13)

where {et} is to be a MIP relative to the available information. The logistic
form for the dependent variable ensures data-admissibility for the constraints
O< R / M < 1, although Rt/M t_ 1 is so small that only positivity is relevant in
practice. Also, P is included to reflect housing market activity, since demand
changes rapidly result in house-price changes given the essentially fixed
stock. Initially estimated models implicitly set 7o at zero and experienced
substantial predictive failure when A l i t - 2 was included as a regressor, posing
a conflict between goodness-of-fit and parameter constancy. However, this
was diagnosed as due to a change in institutional arrangements in 1974 when
continuously rising interest rates forced Building Societies to demand
increases in total monthly payments to maintain positive repayments of
principal [note the nadir of qt in 1974 in fig. 3]. Thus, ~oV is an example of a
transient parameter.
   The OLS estimates of (13) are not interesting per se, but it should be
recorded that #=0.0419 and that both the Chow (1960) test for parameter
constancy (for several periods) and Harvey's (1981) F-version of the Lagrange
Multiplier test for 6th-order autocorrelation [see Godfrey (1978)] were not
significant at the 0.05 level [these tests are denoted ~/1(') and r/2(. ) below,
with degrees of freedom in parentheses]. This evidence is consistent with {et}
being white noise and a MIP on the present information, Next, (13) was
simplified by imposing restrictions consistent with (I), reparameterising any
short distributed lags and deleting inessential variables such that the overall
F-test of all the restrictions was not significant at the 0.05 level [r/3(.) below].
Kiviet (1982) presents evidence about the independence of some of the above
tests of specification and mis-specification [adopting the dichotomy in Mizon
(1977)]; see also Kiviet (1981).
                                    D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models                                                                                                 25


       -31 -




        32-




        33




       -34




       -35



                                                                                                                                  Ill
       -36

                                                                                                                                                                   !


       -37




        38


   7             - -          Actual
                 -- --        Fitted
       -39
                     I        ^
                              CT =     004



        40       ,       i      i          i            [      i            i            ,    i          i         i          i   I      ,   ,      i   i      ,   i      ,   i          ,
                 1959               1961         1963          1965               1967            1969                 1971       1973       1975       1977       1979           1981


                                                                                     Fig. 3.                 q,.


  The simplified equation thus selected for the period 1960(i) to 1981(iii) is

               0t = -- 1.34 + 0.60qt_ 1 0.058z~ ZI, 1 + 0.65A lPt 1 -- 0.78A4m,- 1
                                                                    -   -




                      [0.16] [0.04]     [0.010]        [0.20]         [0.14]

                         -O.090V'AlI,-2+2.3Aldt 1,                                                                                                                                   (]4)
                             [0.027]                                            [0.4]

               T = 94,                         R 2=         0.90,                   d = 0.0405,

               rh(20, 64)=1.36,                              r/2(6,78)=0.51,                                       r/3(17,68)=0.69,                         r/4(1)=5.1,

where the heteroscedasticity-consistent standard errors are given in brackets
[see White (1980), D o m o w i t z and White (1982)], and q~(1) is the test for first-
order A R C H [see Engle (1982)], asymptotically distributed as Z12 on the null
of no A R C H effect. It m a y be noted that the conventionally calculated
standard errors are similar to those reported above.
  Descriptive statistics relevant to the scaled residuals {gj~} are
Maximum                  Minimum                            Skewness                         Excess kurtosis
2.10                     -2.34                              -0.20                            -0.53
26               D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models

There are no evident outlier problems, and the first four moments are similar
to those of a normal distribution, perhaps being somewhat 'flatter'. Fig. 3
shows the graph of {q~} and the corresponding fit.
   Eq. (14) appears to satisfy our criteria for being a TACD. The residual is
white noise [on t/2(-)] and not significantly different from the residual of (13)
[on t/a(')], so it is unlikely that this model could be significantly dominated
on the present information set although there is evidence of autoregressive
conditional heteroscedasticity [t/4(-)]. All the regressors are lagged or non-
stochastic, so ~ measures the actual one-step-ahead forecast standard error,
which is under 4% of JR, and r/l(' ) is consistent with constant parameters
(in fact, for several horizons). It can be shown that the selected model
encompasses both (3) and (4) above (although these are not 'special cases')
and the other R t equations considered in Hendry and Anderson (1977), as
well as variance-dominating the equation in Mayes (1979) [we have been
unable to conduct a formal encompassing test against this last model, which
has a standard error of 7.6%, of /i, but four lagged values of personal
disposable income were insignificant at the 0.05 level if added to (13)]. By
construction, (8) is both data-admissible, in that all values of qt yield
0 < R t / M t 1 < 1, and consistent with (1). The static equilibrium solution yields
N=7.3 years, with substantial seasonal variation between 11.3 years and 6.9
years. The parameters are fairly well determined, with anticipated signs and
sensible magnitudes, and have clear interpretations, almost all the squared
correlations between regressors being negligible (the largest is 0.30 between
qt-1 and a seasonal dummy). Five variables explain most of the non-seasonal
variation in qt since 1974, over which period the largest quarter-on-quarter
change in ( r t - m t _ l ) was 0.40 (about 106), with the observed variance having
increased markedly since 1973. However, an important caveat before
regarding the estimated parameters as measures of invariants of housing
market behaviour is that we have not included any factors to account for
long-run changes in the propensity to move house (e.g. household formation
rates, job mobility determinants, etc.); hopefully (14) may provide a useful
basis for developing a more general encompassing formulation in due course.


6. Dynamic simulation
   Most large-scale estimated dynamic econometric models have been studied
by simulation techniques at some point in their existence. Indeed, simulation
tracking performance is often viewed as a major aspect of 'validating' such
models, i.e., of checking their overall correspondence to 'reality' at least as
revealed by the observed historical data - - see e.g. Sowey (1973) and McNees
(1982). Judging by the frequency with which Root Mean Square Errors
(RMSE's) based on dynamic simulations are quoted and that small RMSE's
seem to be viewed as 'good', it is worthwhile specifically investigating the use
                 D.F. Hendry and J.*F. Richard, Formal analysis of models     27


of n-step MSE's [denoted by M(n) below] as a dominance criterion for
model selection.
   Of course, M(1) is the previously considered variance-dominance criterion,
but the concern here is with M(n) when n is 'large', to highlight the issues
involved. The analysis builds on the work of Haavelmo (1940), but focusses
on different aspects of model evaluation than 'spuriously significant'
variables. Rather, our concern is with the choice of information set
underlying different 'types' of simulation and the bearing that the results of
deterministic simulation exercises may have on assessing the usefulness of a
model for alternative purposes. The analysis proceeds by means of a simple
example which incorporates all the required features; additional complications
like non-linearities, omitted variables and unknown/non-constant parameters
seem liable to exacerbate the problem.
   Consider the linear stationary two-equation process in (15) and (16) where
the parameters are known and constant and the latent roots lie within the
unit circle,


        yt=o~Zt-~j~ytl-[-~,t, (Ut)~N[(O),(;200.2)],
                                         Et     I     0
                                                                            (15)

                                       05fl<l,       0~2<1,
        zt= 2zt-1 + ?Yt-1 +vt,                                              (16)
                                       1~0,          -1<7~0.

  The one-step-ahead system predictions are computed from




and so have error variances

        (a{+~z~r~_(var(ytlYt 1,Z, 1)~
                                                                            (18)
            a~     /-\var     (z,[ Y~ ,, Z,_ 0,,/'

By way of contrast,

        var(ytlY,-1,Z,)=~         from (15).

  There are two alternative means of computing the deterministic dynamic
simulation path for Yt: treating the model as 'open' (so the analysis is
conditional on {zt}) or as 'closed' [so (yt,z,) are jointly simulated] and we
28                 D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis    of models

denote   these by - and -, respectively.      Then

                                  n-1

         X~ctz~+~~~-~~~j~~~~z~-j+s"YO~                    t =   1,. . .) T   &o=Y,.            (19)


   For simplicity in what follows, initial conditions    are ignored when                      this
clarifies the analysis without misleading the logic. From (19) and (15),

                   n-1

         Y*-Y;=     1    P&*-i,                                                                (20)
                   i=O
and hence

         var (y, -Y;) = G:( I-    j?“) = var (y,lZ,, Y,) where          0,” = oz/( 1 - /3’).
                                                                                               (21)

   Note from (20) that (y,-FJ    is autocorrelated   and heteroscedastic,   although
{E,} is neither. Also, as M,(n) is the average of (21) over t = 1,. ., n, for large n
it is approximately   equal to CJ,~,or more generally,


         M,(n) = a,2(
                    1 - /?2(1 - jP”)/n( 1 - P’)).                                              (22)


This notation      is not fully informative    compared      to (21), but (22) is the
expected value of the usual deterministic           simulation    MSE treating   z as
strongly   exogenous.    Of course, if y#O then z is not in fact strongly
exogenous, but it is important       to realise that (22) does not depend on the
actual value of y, only on the assumption       that the model is open.
    Next, consider the closed model simulation



                                                                                               (23)




                                                                                               (24)



which yield, for sufficiently large t, the unconditional               variances      of y, and z,
given by [derived as in e.g. Hendry (1979)]


                   1 - pn) + a”( 1 + /?IZ)afl/[(l - pA)( 1- fl”) - 2&l,
         C,”= L-0,2(
                                                                                               (25)
         u; = [oZ( 1 - gn) + y’( 1 + jU)a,2]/[( 1 - fin)( 1 - AZ)- 2c?yA].
                     D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models     29



In the special case that 7 = 0, the unconditional variance of y is

        ~ 2 = a .2 + {~2(1 + / ~ 2 ) ~ / ( 1   -/~,~)(1 - ~2)(1 - ~?)}.         (26)

   Now, it is an inherent property of closed linear, stationary models (which
are at least TACD's) that their n-step simulation error variance is close to
the unconditional data variance for large n or, alternatively expressed, that
their deterministic simulation track converges on the unconditional data
mean. Consequently, such models appear to track 'very badly' even when
they are valid. Conversely, comparing (22) and (26) when {zt} is strongly
exogenous, how well the model appears to simulate depends on the extent to
which the variance of {y,} is due to {zt} [the term {. } in (26)]. The crucial
difficulty, however, is that (22) is unaffected by the value of y, so that the
'accuracy' of the simulation track is primarily dependent on the extent to
which the selected model attributes data variance to factors which are
'outside the model', irrespective of whether or not such factors really are
strongly exogenous in practice. Nothing in the analysis of simulating {yt}
conditional on Z 1 depended on z being strongly exogenous (except, of course,
the meaningfulness of the procedure!), providing the investigator acted as if it
were, as is clear from the choice of conditioning sets in (21) and (24).
Consequently, the validity of a model cannot be assessed by its n-step
tracking performance alone.
   Rather, { l - M ( n ) / a 2} measures the extent to which the 'explanation' of
{Yt} is attributed to variables which are treated as if they are strongly
exogenous: the validity of the simulation is better assessed by tests of all of
the strong exogeneity claims, and the validity of the model by the criteria
discussed in section 4. This adds a caveat to the analysis in McNees (1982)
since it is not appropriate to define exogenous as 'outside the scope of the
model' , and also points towards techniques for resolving his 'dilemma of
model comparisons' by investigating e.g. encompassing, and the one-step
system predictions like (17).
   It must be stressed that valid inter-model comparisons cannot be based
simply on an agreement between modellers as to which variables may be
taken as strongly exogenous for computing M(n): even if a unique set is
agreed and no other used by any modeller, the model with the lowest M(n)
value ( n > l ) may have nothing to commend it. For example, consider a
comparison between (15) and

                k
        Yt = ~ cPlzt i + et,                                                    (27)
              i=0


with the assertion that g(z,_iet)=O, Vi>O, where (15) and (27) constitute
'rival hypotheses', when the data generation process is (15)+(16) with y@O.
30               D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models

By construction, (15) must therefore encompass and M(1) dominate (27),
although if a~/G
               2 2 happens to be small, ~e2 will be similar in magnitude to G2,
so that there will be little to choose between the models in terms of M(1).
But if both modellers agree to treat z as strongly exogenous, (27) will have a
much better simulation track than (15) with error variance still equal to a2!
Yet if (yt, zt) are jointly simulated, (15) should perform better, with both
having far larger error variances than their equivalent conditional
simulations [-compare (21) and (24)].
   For practical ex ante forecasting, the future values of non-deterministic
'exogenous' variables are unknown and have to be projected by auxiliary
equations, often of a surprisingly ad hoc nature given that the resulting
predictions of the endogenous variables will be conditional thereon. Thus,
var(yr+,[Yr, Zr) is the relevant n-step forecast error variance and this varies
from (18) for n--1 to (25) for very large n, but never coincides with (21). It
follows that conditional simulations of the form (19) do not help select
models which will be best for n-step ex ante forecasts either.
  There are      several   important      implications      of   this   analysis   worth
summarising:
(i)   Ranking models by M(n) as a dominance criterion reflects how much of
      the explanation is attributed to variables not generated in the
      simulation; and hence
(ii) it is not necessarily a criticism of closed 'time-series models' that their
      values of M(n) exceed those of open 'econometric' models for n > 1 (nor a
      virtue for the latter), especially if the former have the smaller M(1) values
      in post-sample forecast tests;
(iii) M(n) values calculated from simulations conditional on assumed known
      'strongly exogenous' variables z need reflect neither the operational (ex
      ante) forecasting characteristics of the model (since zr+i are unknown)
      nor the 'goodness' of the underlying model as a characterisation of the
      D G P (if the z variables are not actually strongly exogenous). It is also
      worth adding that
(iv) stocks will usually appear to simulate 'badly' even when changes in
      stocks are quite well determined due to the additional dynamic latent
      root close to unity.

   These conclusions are demonstrable by computer experiments in which the
D G P is known and alternative models are simulated under valid and invalid
strong exogeneity assumptions. It must be stressed, however, that the only
point at issue here is the assessment of model validity by dynamic
simulation, using M(n) as a selection criterion. Comparative simulations - -
with the model fixed and the inputs perturbated as a numerical method for
calculating multipliers - - have not been criticised, although it is well known
                   D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models                31

that such counterfactuals depend on assumptions about super-exogeneity
instead [see Lucas (1976), Engle et al. (1981)].


7. Conclusion
    An analysis of empirical-model concepts suggests that there are pertinent
considerations affecting how much models should be designed when available
 theory is not a complete quantitative characterisation of the world. Many of
 the notions investigated above are well known, but have previously been
justified by arguments whose relevance is unclear when the model does not
 include the data generation process as a special case. Moreover, the
 relationships between widely used criteria for model selection do not seem to
 have been the subject of much previous analysis.
    Data modelling advances beyond mere description only if sustained by an
 associated theory, so we have assumed throughout that the best available
 theory is adopted. Nevertheless, no economic theory is likely to
 comprehensively explain all observed phenomena and some means of
 ordering empirical models remains desirable. The main ordering discussed
 above is based on encompassing both because it offers a more stringent
 check on model adequacy than that conventionally used (e.g. variance-
 dominance combined with white-noise errors is only necessary and is not
 sufficient to ensure encompassing) and because it provides one possible
 operational implementation of a progressive research strategy. 3 By way of
 comparison, it does not seem valid to base an ordering on dynamic
 simulation n-step mean square errors (for large n) alone.
    Our practical experience, despite the turbulence of the 1970's, is that
 theory-consistent, data-coherent, parsimonious encompassing models can be
 developed. Further, those that have been proposed tend to manifest relatively
 constant parameters of interest for quite extensive time periods, despite
 changes in data correlations [for a recent appraisal of U.K. consumption
 functions, see Davis (1982)]. The simple empirical example presented to
 illustrate the analysis is consistent with this view.

  3Even so, we regrettably concur with Blaug (1980), that empirical investigators in economics
are unlikely to progress beyond being mere handmaidens to theorists.


References
Amemiya, T., 1980, Selection of regressors, International Economic Review 21, 331-354.
Blaug, M., 1980, The methodology of economics: How economists explain (Cambridge
   University Press, Cambridge).
Brainard, W. and J. Tobin, 1968, Econometric models: Their problems and usefulness, American
   Economic Association Papers and Proceedings, May, 99 149.
Chow, G.C., 1960, Tests of equality between sets of coefficients in two linear regressions,
   Econometrica 28, 591~505.
32                  O.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models

Chow, G,C., 1981, Selection of econometric models by the information criteria, Ch. 8 in: E.G.
    Charatsis, ed., Proceedings of the Econometric Society European meeting 1979 (North-
    Holland, Amsterdam).
Cox, D.R., 1961, Tests of separate families of hypotheses, in: Proceedings of the fourth Berkeley
    symposium on mathematical statistics and probability, Vol. 1 (University of California Press,
    Berkeley, CA) 105-123.
Crowder, M.J., 1976, Maximum likelihood estimation for dependent observations, Journal of the
    Royal Statistical Society B 38, 45-53.
Davidson, J.E.H. and D.F. Hendry, 1981, Interpreting econometric evidence: Consumers'
   expenditure in the United Kingdom, European Economic Review 16, 177-192.
Davidson, J.E.H., D.F. Hendry, F. Srba and S. Yeo, 1978, Econometric modelling of the
    aggregate time-series relationship between consumers' expenditure and income in the United
    Kingdom, The Economic Journal 88, 661-692.
Davis, E.P., 1982, The consumption function in current macro-economic models: A comparative
    study, Discussion paper (Bank of England, London).
Domowitz, I. and H. White, 1981, Nonlinear regression with dependent observations, Discussion
    paper no. 81-32 (University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA).
Domowitz, I. and H. White, 1982, Mis-specified models with dependent observations, Journal of
   Econometrics, this issue.
Einstein, A., 1950, Out of my later years (London).
Engle, R.F., 1982, Autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity with estimates of the variance of
   United Kingdom inflations, Econometrica 50, 987-1008.
Engle, R.F., D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, 1981, Exogeneity, Econometrica, forthcoming.
Florens, J.-P. and M. Mouchart, 1980a, Initial and sequential reduction of Bayesian experiments,
   CORE discussion paper no. 8015 (Universit~ Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve).
Florens, J.-P. and M. Mouchart, 1980b, Conditioning in econometric models, CORE discussion
   paper no. 8042 (Universit6 Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve).
Florens, J.-P. and M. Mouchart, 1981, A linear theory for non-causality, CORE unpublished
   paper (Universit6 Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve).
Godfrey, L.G., 1978, Testing against general autoregressive and moving average error models
   when the regressors include lagged dependent variables, Econometrica 46, 1293-1301.
Granger, C.W.J., 1969, Investigating causal relations by econometric models and cross-spectral
   methods, Econometrica 37, 424438.
Granger, C.W.J., 1980a, Testing for causality - - A personal viewpoint, Journal of Economic
   Dynamics and Control 2, 329-352.
Granger, C.W.J., 1980b, Forecasting white noise, Discussion paper no. 80-31 (University of
   California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA).
Granger, C.W.J. and P. Newbold, 1974, Spurious regressions in econometrics, Journal of
   Econometrics 2, 111-120.
Haavelmo, T., 1940, The inadequacy of testing dynamic theory by comparing theoretical
   solutions and observed cycles, Econometrica 8, 312 321.
Harvey, A.C., 1981, The Kalman filter and its applications in econometrics and time-series
   analysis, Invited paper presented at the Symposium fiber Operations Research, Augsburg.
Harvey, A.C., 1981, The econometric analysis of time series (Philip Allen, Oxford).
Hayek, F.A., 1963, Studies in philosophy, politics and economics (Routledge and Kegan Paul,
   London).
Hendry, D.F., 1979, The behaviour of inconsistent instrumental variables estimators in dynamic
   systems with autocorrelated errors, Journal of Econometrics 9, 295-314. (Also see E.
   Maasoumi and P.C.B. Phillips, and a Reply in V01. 19, 1982.)
Hendry, D.F., 1980a, Predictive failure and econometric modelling in macroeconomics: The
   transactions demand for money, in: P. Ormerod, ed., Modelling the economy (Heinemann
   Educational Books, London).
Hendry, D.F. and G.J. Anderson, 1977, Testing dynamic specification in small simultaneous
   systems: An application to a model of building society behaviour in the United Kingdom, in:
   M.D. Intriligator, ed., Frontiers in quantitative economics, Vol. IlIA (North-Holland,
   Amsterdam).
Hendry, D.F. and G.E. Mizon, 1978, Serial correlation as a convenient simplification, not a
   nuisance: A comment on a study of the demand for money by the Bank of England, The
   Economic Journal 88, 549-563.
Hendry, D.F. and J.-F. Richard, 1981, The econometric analysis of economic time series,
   International Statistical Review, forthcoming.
                    D.F. Hendry and J.-F. Richard, Formal analysis of models                   33

Hendry, D.F., A.R. Pagan and J.D. Sargan, 1981, Dynamic specification, in: Z. Griliches and
    M.D. Intriligator, eds., Handbook of econometrics (North-Holland, Amsterdam) forthcoming.
H.M. Treasury, 1980, Macroeconomic model technical manual (H.M. Treasury, London).
Hume, D., 1758, An enquiry concerning human understanding, 1927 edition (Open Court Publ.
    Co., Chicago, IL).
Kiviet, J.F., 1981, On the rigor of some specification tests for modelling dynamic relationships,
     Paper presented to the Conference of Econometric Society, Amsterdam.
Kiviet, J.F., 1982, Size, power and interdependence of tests in sequential procedures for
    modelling dynamic relationships, Unpublished paper (University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam).
Lakatos, I., 1974, Falsification and the methodology of scientific research programmes, in: I.
     Lakatos and A.E. Musgrave, eds., Criticism and the growth of knowledge (Cambridge
     University Press, Cambridge).
Learner, E.E., 1978, Specification searches: Ad-hoc inference with non-experimental data (Wiley,
    New York).
Losee, J., 1980, A historical introduction to the philosophy of science (Oxford University Press,
     Oxford).
Lucas, R.E., 1976, Econometric policy evaluation: A critique, in: K. Brunner and A.H. Meltzer,
    eds., The Phillips curve and labor markets, Carnegie-Rochester conference series on public
    policy, Vol. I (North-Holland, Amsterdam) 1946.
Lucas, R.E. and T.J. Sargent, 1981, eds,, Rational expectations and econometric practice (Allen
    and Unwin, London).
Madansky, A., 1976, Foundations of econometrics (North-Holland, Amsterdam).
Malinvaud, E., 1966, Statistical methods of econometrics (North-Holland, Amsterdam).
Mayes, D.G., 1979, The property boom (Martin Robertson, Oxford).
McNees, S.K., 1982, The role of macroeconometric models in forecasting and policy analysis in
    the United States, Journal of Forecasting l, 37-48.
Mizon, G.E., 1977, Inferential procedures in non-linear models - - An application in a UK
    industrial cross-section study of factor substitution and returns to scale, Econometrica 45,
     1221-1242.
Mizon, G.E. and J.-F. Richard, 1981, The encompassing principle and its application to non-
    nested hypotheses, Discussion paper (Southampton University, Southampton).
Poirier, D., 1981, Posterior odds analysis when all competing models are false, Econonfics
    Letters 8, 135-140.
Rothenberg, T.J., 1973, Efficient estimation with a priori information, Cowles Foundation
    monograph 23 (Yale University Press, New Haven, CT).
Sargan, J.D., 1980, Some tests of dynamic specification for a single equation, Econometrica 48,
    879 897.
Sargent, T.J., 1981, Interpreting economic time series, Journal of Political Economy 89, 213 248.
Sawyer, K.P., 1982, Econometric model selection in perspective, Unpublished paper (Australian
    National University, Canberra).
Simon, H.A., 1953, Causal ordering and identifiability, Ch. 3 in: W.C. Hood and T.C.
    Koopmans, eds., Studies in econometric method, Cowles Foundation monograph 14 (Yale
    University Press, New Haven, CT).
Sims, C.A., 1980, Macroeconomics and reality, Econometrica 48, 1-48.
Sowey, E.R., 1973, Stochastic simulation of macroeconomic models: Methodology and
    interpretation, Ch. 8 in: A.A. Powell and R.A. Williams, eds., Econometric studies of macro
    and monetary relations (North-Holland, Amsterdam).
Spanos, A., 1981, Disequilibrium, latent variables and identities, Unpublished paper (Birkbeck
    College, London).
Theil, H., 1971, Principles of econometrics (Wiley, New York).
Waelbroeck, J.K., ed., 1976, The models of project LINK (North-Holland, Amsterdam).
Wallis, K.F., 1977, Multiple time series analysis and the final form of econometric models,
    Econometrica 45, 1481-1497.
White, H., 1980, A heteroscedastic-consistent covariance matrix estimator and a direct test for
    heteroscedasticity, Econometrica 48, 421448.
Whittle, P., 1970, Probability (Penguin Library of University Mathematics, Harmondsworth).
Worrall, J. and G. Currie, eds., 1978, The methodology of scientific research programmes, Vol. 1:
    Imre Lakatos (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge).
Zellner, A., 1979, Causality and econometrics, in: K. Brunner and A.H. Meltzer, eds., Three
    aspects of policy and policymaking (North-Holland, Amsterdam).
