This page intentionally left blank
SCIENCE AND PARTIAL TRUTH
OXFORD STUDIES IN THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE


General Editor
  Paul Humphreys, University of Virginia

Advisory Board
  Jeremy Butterﬁeld
  Peter Galison
  Ian Hacking
  Philip Kitcher
  Richard Miller
  James Woodward

The Book of Evidence
Peter Achinstein
Science, Truth, and Democracy
Philip Kitcher
The Devil in the Details: Asymptotic Reasoning in Explanation,
  Reduction, and Emergence
Robert W. Batterman
Science and Partial Truth: A Unitary Approach to Models
   and Scientiﬁc Reasoning
Newton C. A. da Costa and Steven French
SCIENCE AND
PARTIAL TRUTH
A Unitary Approach to Models
and Scientific Reasoning



NEWTON C. A. DA COSTA
STEVEN FRENCH




1
2003
1
Oxford New York
Auckland Bangkok Buenos Aires Cape Town Chennai
Dar es Salaam Delhi Hong Kong Istanbul Karachi Kolkata
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Mumbai Nairobi
São Paulo Shanghai Taipei Tokyo Toronto

Copyright # 2003 by Oxford University Press
Published by Oxford University Press, Inc.
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
www.oup.com
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Costa, Newton C. A. da
Science and partial truth : a unitary approach to models and scientiﬁc reasoning /
by Newton C. A. da Costa and Steven French.
   p. cm. - (Oxford studies in philosophy of science)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-19-515651-X
1. Reasoning. 2. Science-Philosophy. I. French, Steven.
II. Title III. Series.
Q175.32.R45C67 2003
501-dc21          2002070449




9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper
TO NEUSA AND DENA, WITH PROFOUND GRATITUDE
This page intentionally left blank
         ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

In developing the ideas presented here, we bear an enormous debt to certain
colleagues, students, and friends. In particular, we would like to thank Otávio
Bueno, Décio Krause, and James Ladyman for their stimulating comments,
criticisms, and overall support. Although they are not, of course, to be held
responsible for any of the views expressed in this book, it would have been
very much diminished if not for them. The bulk of this work was completed
while Steven French was on sabbatical, funded by the University of Leeds and
the School of Philosophy. He would like to express his deep gratitude to the
university for supporting this work but most especially to all his colleagues in
the School and the Division of History and Philosophy of Science.
    Our account is based on a number of papers published over the past ten
years or so. The technical counterpart to chapter 1 can be found in Miken-
berg, da Costa, and Chuaqui (1986), and chapter 2 is based in part upon da
Costa and French (1990a and 2000). Much of chapter 3 is new, but the
central idea of ‘‘partial isomorphism’’ is from French and Ladyman (1999).
The basis of chapter 4 can be found in da Costa and French (1993a), whereas
aspects of chapter 5 can be found scattered through a variety of publications,
including da Costa and French (1991a) and French (1990). Elements of
chapter 6 are mostly based on French (1997), and chapter 7 draws on earlier
work presented in da Costa (1987b) and da Costa and French (1988, 1989a,
and 1991b). Chapter 8 is almost entirely new, but all the chapters in this book
represent substantial additions to and extensions of our earlier published
works. We would like to thank The American Philosophical Quarterly, Boletim da
Sociedade Paranaense de Matemática, Elsevier, Erkenntnis, International Studies
in the Philosophy of Science, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Oxford University
Press, and Rodopi Publishers for permission to reproduce elements of our
published papers here.
This page intentionally left blank
        CONTENTS
     Introduction: Aims and Overview 3

1.   Truth, the Whole Truth, and Partial Truth 8

2.   Theories and Models    21

3.   Models and Models 40

4.   Acceptance, Belief, and Commitment    61

5.   Inconsistency in Science 84

6.   Partiality, Pursuit, and Practice   107

7.   Quasi Truth and the Nature of Induction    130

8.   From Pragmatic Realism to Structural Empiricism 160

9.   Extensions 195

     Notes   201

     References    235

     Index   253
This page intentionally left blank
SCIENCE AND PARTIAL TRUTH
This page intentionally left blank
         INTRODUCTION
         Aims and Overview


One of the enduring consequences of the naturalist turn in the philosophy of
science has been a reappraisal of the nature and importance of scientiﬁc
practice. A less palatable consequence, at least for many, has been the con-
clusion that no unitary account of reasoning can accommodate the vagaries
and complexities of such practice. And so in both the philosophy and so-
ciology of science, we ﬁnd attempts to construct accounts of practice which
can accommodate the supposedly ‘‘local’’ character of knowledge production
and the apparently fragmented nature of representations and experimental
techniques. This tendency can be seen in the recent focus on model building
in science, where it is claimed that a signiﬁcant portion of this particular
practice is concerned with low-level, ‘‘phenomenological’’ models, rather than
the high-level theoretical forms typically examined by philosophers of science.
Reprising similar claims made in the 1960s, it is then argued that the nature
and role of these low-level models is such that they cannot be captured by any
kind of unitary framework, either because they are supposedly ‘‘autonomous’’
from theory or because they are mutually inconsistent.
   What these claims demonstrate is the continued unfolding of the post-
positivist gulf between our actual knowledge-gathering activities and the phi-
losophical characterization of these activities. The suggestion that in the face of
this breach it is our activities, our practice, which must be brought back in line
rings increasingly hollow as the counterexamples proliferate. It is our con-
tention, however, that a conceptually unitary and broadly rationalist account
can be constructed which pays close attention to and incorporates two fun-
damental aspects of epistemic practice in general. The ﬁrst, which will be the
primary focus of this work, concerns the nature of the representations em-
ployed in scientiﬁc reasoning and the epistemic attitudes adopted toward them.
These representations are, crucially, conceptually incomplete and open-ended,


                                        3
and the overall attitude adopted is a fallibilistic one. Doxastically, the rep-
resentations employed in scientiﬁc practice are regarded, not as true in the
correspondence sense, but as partially true or approximately true, or as con-
taining an element of truth. However, attempts to capture such notions within
an analytic framework have typically foundered on the lack of their formal
expression in a manner similar to that which Tarski provided for correspon-
dence truth.
   We believe that such a barrier has now been overcome with the devel-
opment of a formal notion of ‘‘pragmatic,’’ ‘‘partial,’’ or ‘‘quasi’’ truth. Having
such a notion to hand then allows one to claim that the high-level theories of
physics, for example, while clearly not true in the correspondence sense, are
nevertheless true in this partial respect and in a way that removes the ill-
motivated and ultimately implausible doxastic separation between such the-
ories and the phenomenological models. Even more important, perhaps, these
formal developments offer a new perspective on the nature of the rep-
resentations themselves. Tarski’s innovation not only formally secured truth-
as-correspondence, at least to some, but it also signiﬁcantly furthered, if not
initiated, the model-theoretic account of these representations. This account
has had an enormous inﬂuence in the philosophy of science, where it offers
the only unitary perspective in these philosophically fractured post-Kuhnian
times. By introducing the notion of ‘‘partial structures’’ into the model-
theoretic or ‘‘semantic’’ approach, the formalism of ‘‘quasi’’ truth offers a way
of accommodating the conceptual incompleteness inherent in scientiﬁc re-
presentations and thus ties together both ‘‘theories’’ and ‘‘models’’ in all their
various manifestations.
   The second aspect of practice concerns methodology rather than rep-
resentation and truth. Although methodological issues per se are not our
primary concern, we claim that some light can be shed on them from the
perspective developed here. In particular, if models and theories in their
various guises are regarded as partially true only, then the classic discovery-
justiﬁcation distinction crumbles through doxastic parity. Our unitary epis-
temology then drives a unitary account of theory development in which a
variety of heuristic procedures are employed and guidelines followed, the
results of which can be represented in terms of structural interconnections.
The impact of epistemic factors-such as good old-fashioned evidence-can
also be captured, by suitably modifying Bayesian inductive logic in order to
accommodate quasi truth.
    In chapter 1 we shall review the formalism of ‘‘pragmatic’’ or ‘‘quasi’’
truth, which was originally presented by Mikenberg, da Costa, and Chuaqui
(1986), highlighting those aspects that we shall draw upon in our further
discussion. Just as Tarski’s formalization attempted to capture what he called
the ‘‘intentions’’ of the correspondence view of truth, so the formalism out-
lined here attempts to represent the ‘‘intentions’’ of the pragmatists, notably
Peirce and James. Of these, perhaps the most signiﬁcant is a concern with
those representations of the world that are not perfect copies but are, in
certain respects, incomplete and partial. The nature of the agreement between
such representations and the world is then spelled out in pragmatic terms,


4   Introduction
which emphasize the set of empirical consequences of a particular idea or
‘‘concept.’’ The fundamental formal device behind this formalism is that of a
‘‘partial structure,’’ and it is upon this that our epistemic construction rests.
    Tarski’s innovation performed a double duty in both mathematics and
philosophy. In formalizing an intuitive notion of truth-as-correspondence in
terms of ‘‘sentence s is true in a structure A’’ and suggesting that other
semantic notions could be deﬁned similarly, he brought model theory into
mathematics and was therefore largely responsible for the explosion of devel-
opments that resulted. Motivated by Tarski’s work, Beth, Suppes, Suppe, van
Fraassen, and others argued that the semantic counterpart of scientiﬁc the-
ories is of fundamental importance, some of them even suggesting that sci-
entiﬁc theories should be viewed not as axiomatized sets of sentences in some
suitable formal language but as classes of models. This, of course, forms the
basis of the ‘‘semantic’’ or ‘‘model-theoretic’’ approach in the philosophy of
science, presented in chapter 2. Likewise, the introduction of partial structures
performs a similar double duty within our overall approach. It allows for the
deﬁnition of a notion of ‘‘pragmatic’’ or ‘‘partial’’ truth, which casts a wide
variety of issues in a new light. And it provides a more sophisticated concept
of ‘‘model’’ or, more generally, ‘‘structure,’’ which accommodates the es-
sential incompleteness and partial nature of scientiﬁc representations. In this
way it further advances the model-theoretic approach by allowing it to ac-
commodate some of the more complex aspects of scientiﬁc practice indicated
here.
    Thus in chapter 3, we explore the consequences of introducing the idea of a
‘‘partial’’ structure into this approach to theories. A fundamental issue within
the model-theoretic approach concerns the relationship between theories,
viewed as families of mathematical models, and the kinds of models which
scientists regularly deploy in their practice. Representing the former in terms
of partial structures allows for the accommodation of the latter, covering the
whole gamut of kinds from ‘‘iconic’’ to ‘‘impoverished,’’ together with Hesse’s
famous account of positive and negative analogies. At the heart of the model-
theoretic approach lies the idea that theories should be regarded as ‘‘extra-
linguistic entities,’’ so that a change in logical, metamathematical axiom-
atization should not be counted as a change in ‘‘theory’’ per se. This focus on
the models or, more generally, the structures in which sentences are satisﬁed
encourages a shift to a broadly representational and nonpropositional account
of the objects of belief. The consequences of such a move have yet to be fully
explored in this context (indeed, it has barely come to be acknowledged), and
in chapter 4 we set out a possible doxastic framework for understanding this
shift in epistemic attention.
    In particular, we draw on Sperber’s account of the difference between
‘‘factual’’ and ‘‘representational’’ beliefs, where the object of the latter is a
‘‘semipropositional’’ representation of incomplete conceptual content. Our
suggestion is that the fundamental idea behind this notion can be con-
veniently grasped in terms of partial structures: a ‘‘representational’’ belief
that p is then understood as a belief that p is partially true only, whereas
a factual belief that p is a belief that p is true in the correspondence sense.


                                                                Introduction   5
With regard to the latter, there is an awareness of that to which p corresponds
only, but in the case of the former there is an awareness of a commitment to a
particular representation. Since it is commitment in this sense that is typically
invoked in accounts of ‘‘acceptance,’’ this framework suggests a unitary ac-
count of belief and acceptance that cuts across recent discussions of these
concepts. Although often employed within the philosophy of science, these
notions have not been given the attention their epistemic importance war-
rants. Here we shall consider two important consequences of our account: the
treatment of inconsistencies in science and the blurring of the discovery-
justiﬁcation distinction, in chapters 5 and 6, respectively.
    One response to the existence of inconsistent theories in science is to
abandon the framework of classical logic while maintaining truth-as-
correspondence and admit the possibility of true contradictions. However, this
fails to ﬁt the very scientiﬁc practice that it draws upon, and in particular, it
fails to adequately accommodate the partial representational nature of sci-
entiﬁc theories. On our view, inconsistent theories are not be dismissed out of
hand as irrational, as on the standard view, nor contemplated as re-
presentations of some ‘‘Hegelian’’ reality, as suggested by the ﬁrst response
above, but rather they are to be taken at face value as open-ended structures
that point the way to consistent successors. It is worth noting that, although
classical logic is retained at the level of the representations themselves, al-
though not, perhaps, at that of factual beliefs, the logic of quasi truth is
interestingly paraconsistent (see da Costa, Bueno, and French, 1998a).
    Consideration of inconsistent theories is typically relegated to the domains
of discovery and pursuit, with unanalyzed notions of ‘‘entertainment’’ pro-
duced to cover the doxastic attitudes involved. Our approach does away with
the need for such notions and, by regarding both consistent and inconsistent
theories as partially true only, signiﬁcantly blurs the discovery-justiﬁcation
distinction. The collapse of this distinction has long been urged by post-
positivist philosophers and historians of science, but in chapter 6 we em-
phasize that the tendency to allow sociological concerns to ﬂood over into
justiﬁcation can be resisted through an articulation of the epistemic structure
of heuristics. In particular, we explore the role of heuristic criteria in estab-
lishing structural relations between models and suggest that the discovery-
justiﬁcation distinction should be replaced by a unitary notion along the lines
of theory ‘‘development.’’ In this way the challenge of the contextualists can
be met, and while on the one hand partial structures offer a means of rep-
resenting the ‘‘openness’’ of theories and models, on the other the focus on
heuristics in terms of structure offers a plausible topography of the space of
such development.
    In chapter 7 we turn our attention from ‘‘horizontal’’ relationships be-
tween theories to the ‘‘vertical’’ relationship between theory and evidence. In
particular, we consider the impact of our conception of ‘‘partial’’ truth on the
dynamics of belief change. By regarding belief in the terms outlined here, a
new basis for a logic of induction can be constructed, which, we hold, is
faithful to the central principles of induction as set down by Russell and which
can handle various well-known problems that are taken to beset standard


6   Introduction
Bayesian approaches. In particular, we show that the standard, but im-
plausible, assumption of ‘‘logical omniscience’’ can be appropriately wea-
kened through a formal modiﬁcation of the notion of ‘‘quasi truth.’’
    Of course, whenever one has to consider the nature of truth in science, it is
hard to avoid the realism-antirealism debate. The relevant issues are touched
on throughout the book, but in our penultimate chapter we try to bring them
all together and subject them to critical analysis from our overall ‘‘pragmatic’’
perspective. In particular, we examine the three main ‘‘attack routes’’ taken
against realism: the underdetermination of theories by evidence, the pessi-
mistic metainduction, and the realists’ use of inference to the best explana-
tion. With regard to the ﬁrst, underdetermination, we indicate how certain
attempts to tackle this problem by appealing to ‘‘background’’ theories can be
nicely accommodated within the framework of partial structures and quasi
truth. As far as the pessimistic metainduction is concerned, we offer some
criticisms of a recent attempt to blunt its force and suggest that Ladyman’s
form of ‘‘structural realism’’ might offer a more fruitful approach. The latter
recommendation should come as no surprise, given Ladyman’s explicit ad-
vocacy of the partial structures line! The ﬁnal issue is trickier, involving as it
does the entwined questions as to the status of realism itself and how it might
best be defended. Recent attempts at a ‘‘naturalistic’’ defense appear to fall
foul of accusations that such moves beg the question, and we offer a broadly
pragmatist approach as one possible way forward. Alternatively, one might
decide to abandon realism entirely and turn to Bueno’s ‘‘structural empiri-
cism,’’ which incorporates both partial structures and quasi truth, understood
from an antirealist perspective. Thus our approach may be put into service by
both sides in the debate as a useful framework for clarifying a range of issues.
    As we hope to have shown, these twin notions of quasi truth and partial
structures form the core of a rich and fruitful program with applications
across philosophy and philosophy of science. In our ﬁnal chapter, we brieﬂy
indicate some of these further applications. It is our ﬁrm, if ambitious, belief
that we can accommodate the complexity and variety of all our cognitive
practices within a unitary framework by explicitly acknowledging the open-
ness and partiality of our representational structures. There is, of course, a
great deal more work still to be done-there always is-but we hope you will
ﬁnd this work as stimulating and provocative as we have.




                                                                 Introduction   7
          1
          TRUTH, THE WHOLE TRUTH,
          AND PARTIAL TRUTH

   Tarski and the Correspondence Theory of Truth

‘‘The present article is almost wholly devoted to a single problem-the deﬁ-
nition of truth.’’ Thus begins one of the most remarkable papers in logic and
philosophy published this century, Tarski’s ‘‘The Concept of Truth in For-
malized Languages,’’ ﬁrst presented to the Warsaw Scientiﬁc Society in 1931.
The paper continues by spelling out the task to be undertaken, which is
   to construct-with reference to a given language-a materially adequate
   and formally correct deﬁnition of the term ‘‘true sentence.’’ This problem,
   which belongs to the classical questions of philosophy, raises considerable
   difﬁculties. For although the meaning of the term ‘‘true sentence’’ in col-
   loquial language seems to be quite clear and intelligible, all attempts to
   deﬁne this meaning more precisely have hitherto been fruitless, and many
   investigations in which this term has been used and which started with
   apparently evident premises have often led to paradoxes and antinomies (for
   which, however, a more or less satisfactory solution has been found). The
   concept of truth shares in this respect the fate of other analogous concepts
   in the domain of the semantics of language. (Tarski 1935, p. 152)
There are two fundamental aspects of Tarski’s achievement that we would like
to emphasize. First and foremost, as Tarski himself explicitly stated in the
introduction to this paper, he was exclusively concerned with what he called
the ‘‘classical’’ conception of truth, which understands this notion in terms of
‘‘corresponding with reality’’ (Tarski 1935, p. 153).1 The intuition underlying
what we shall interpret as a ‘‘correspondence’’ view of truth, and which a
‘‘semantical deﬁnition’’ would have to grasp, in some sense, was expressed as
follows: ‘‘a true sentence is one which says that the state of affairs is so and so, and
the state of affairs is indeed so and so’’ (Tarski 1935, p. 155; Tarski cites Aris-
totle’s famous dictum, ‘‘To say of what is that it is not, or of what is not that it


                                           8
is, is false, while to say of what is that it is, or of what is not that it is not, is
true’’). Thus, statements of the form ‘‘the sentence x is true if and only if p’’-a
particular example being the famous ‘‘ ‘it is snowing’ if and only if it is
snowing’’-were regarded by Tarski as ‘‘partial deﬁnitions’’ of the concept of
truth or, more precisely, as he put it, as explanations of the sense of expressions
of the type, the sentence x is true.
    It is because Tarski’s construction is built upon these kinds of partial de-
ﬁnitions, or explanations, that it has elicited a variety of reactions, ranging
from the view that it ﬁnally resolves the problem of truth, to the claim that it
is trivial, to the further claim that it is actually irrelevant (see Fernández
Moreno 2001). However, as Mates notes, ‘‘however uninformative and trivial
[such statements] may seem, . . . they say just what needs to be said about the
relation between a true sentence and the world, and they say it neat’’ (Mates
1974, p. 396). Unencumbered by the metaphysical baggage of individuals
and attributes and concepts that weigh down the alternatives, Tarski’s offers,
in our view, a spare, trimmed-down account of what it is for a proposition to
be true, in the correspondence sense.
    His remarkable technical achievement was then to show how this ac-
count-and, in particular, the recursive heart of it-could be elaborated for
formalized languages containing quantiﬁers.2 This brings us to the second
aspect we wish to emphasize here. At the end of the ﬁrst section of ‘‘The
Concept of Truth in Formalized Languages,’’ Tarski concludes, pessimistically,
that ‘‘the very possibility of a consistent use of the expression ‘true sentence’ which
is in harmony with the laws of logic and the spirit of everyday language seems to be
very questionable, and consequently the same doubt attaches to the possibility of
constructing a correct deﬁnition of this expression’’ (Tarski 1935, p. 165, em-
phasis in text). The ‘‘spirit’’ of everyday or ‘‘colloquial,’’ language that creates
this disharmony is its ‘‘universality,’’ which encourages admission into the
language, in addition to sentences and other expressions, the names of these
sentences and other expressions, together with sentences containing them,
and, of course, semantic expressions like ‘‘true sentence’’ (Tarski 1935,
p. 164). It is precisely this which leads to the ‘‘semantical antinomies,’’ such
as the liar paradox. Tarski’s famous response to this problem is to simply
abandon the attempt to construct a consistent deﬁnition of truth for everyday
language and instead restrict attention to formalized languages, such as the
example he then explores, the language of classes.
    In particular, Tarski notes, such languages do not contain any expressions
that themselves denote signs and expressions of the language or are ‘‘struc-
tural-descriptive’’ in the sense of describing the structural connections be-
tween such expressions. Thus, ‘‘we must always distinguish clearly between
the language about which we speak and the language in which we speak’’
(Tarski 1935, p. 167). A formalized language about which we are interested is
regarded as the object language in the former sense, whereas the language in
which the names of the expressions of the object language and the relations
between them are introduced is, of course, the metalanguage.
    It is into the metalanguage that the term ‘‘true’’ is introduced via a ‘‘for-
mally correct’’ deﬁnition, and if this is done in such a way that every statement


                                 Truth, the Whole Truth, and Partial Truth 9
of the form above can be proved on the basis of the axioms and rules of
inference of the metalanguage, then, according to Tarski, this deﬁnition of
truth is said to be ‘‘materially adequate’’ (1936, p. 404). It is this latter idea
that is expressed in the famous ‘‘Convention T’’:

   A formally correct deﬁnition of the symbol ‘‘Tr,’’ formulated in the metalanguage,
   will be called an adequate deﬁnition of truth if it has the following [con-
   sequence]:
   . . . all sentences which are obtained from the expression ‘‘x [ Tr if and only if p’’
   by substituting for the symbol ‘‘x’’ a structural-descriptive name of any sentence
   of the language in question and for the symbol ‘‘p’’ the expression which forms the
   translation of this sentence into the metalanguage. (1935, p. 188; emphasis in
   original)

    Within the constraint expressed by Convention T, a deﬁnition of truth for
sentences of the object language can then be provided in terms of the meta-
language. More speciﬁcally, what the metalanguage does is provide an in-
terpretation for, or model of, the object language. This interpretation or model
consists of two parts: (1) a universe of discourse, A, consisting of a nonempty
set of elements, and (2) a function for the vocabulary of the object language
which assigns to each individual constant of this language an element of A-
that is, its denotation-and which assigns to each n-ary predicate symbol of
the object language a set of n-tuples of A, that is, the predicate symbol’s
extension.
    Tarski expressed the nature of this latter function in terms of the notion of
the ‘‘satisfaction’’ of a given sentence by a sequence of objects and, most
importantly, showed how this notion could be recursively deﬁned. This then
‘‘leads us directly to the concept of truth’’ (1935, p. 189) since all that needs
to be established, for a particular formalized language, is which sequences of
elements of A satisfy the fundamental sentences, or well-formed formulas, of
the object language and how this notion of satisfaction behaves under the
application of the basic operations of this language: ‘‘As soon as we have
succeeded in making precise the sense of this concept of satisfaction, the
deﬁnition of truth presents no further difﬁculty: the true sentences may be
deﬁned as those sentences which are satisﬁed by an arbitrary sequence of
objects’’ (Tarski 1935, p. 215). And so Tarski succeeded in reducing ‘‘truth’’
to the more basic notion of ‘‘satisfaction’’ and effectively created model theory
on the side.
    What is clear from all this is that truth and our semantic concepts in general
have a ‘‘relative character’’ in the sense that ‘‘they must always be related to a
particular language’’ (Tarski 1936, p. 402). Putting it more explicitly, in order
to talk rigorously of truth in this manner, we require not only a language L but
also an interpretation I of L in a structure A. This is what the metalanguage
provides. A sentence of L is then true or false only with reference to I; that is,
truth and falsity are properties of sentences of a particular language L, in
accordance with an interpretation I of L in some structure A. Informally, of
course, we may assert a sentence of L as being true, without mentioning the
interpretation; rigorously speaking, this is unacceptable. This is the second


10 Science and Partial Truth
aspect of Tarski’s achievement that we wish to emphasize, and we do so be-
cause it is so often overlooked.
   There are two further points to note before we move on. The ﬁrst is that the
temptation to dismiss out of hand Tarskian approaches to truth because they
do not apply to ‘‘everyday’’ languages must be resisted. As Tarski himself
noted, any attempt to apply some kind of ‘‘exact method’’ to the semantics of
everyday language will run into the semantic paradoxes, unless the uni-
versality of that language is effectively removed by some sort of reforming
measure, in which case this ‘‘everyday’’ language would in fact take on the
characteristics of a formalized language.3
   Furthermore, and more importantly for the point of view to be explored in
this work, ‘‘The results obtained for formalised languages also have a certain
validity for colloquial language, and this is owing to its universality: if we
translate into colloquial language any deﬁnition of a true sentence which has
been constructed for some formalised language, we obtain a fragmentary
deﬁnition of truth which embraces a wider or narrower category of sentences’’
(1935, p. 165, fn. 2). Thus, Tarski’s formulation can be taken to apply to
those portions of everyday languages that are adequately represented by an
appropriate formalized language (ﬁrst-order predicate logic, say). If, as many
have held, the language of science can be adequately captured by such a for-
malized language, then Tarski would seem to have provided a formal un-
derstanding of truth-as-correspondence within science.
   Nevertheless, three caveats remain. The ﬁrst and most general is that,
within everyday or colloquial language, we still have only a ‘‘fragmentary’’
deﬁnition of truth on this basis, and the question arises whether it might not
be possible to appropriately ‘‘defragment’’ to some extent this deﬁnition or,
equivalently, widen the category of sentences it embraces by some suitable
modiﬁcation. Second, the hope that Tarski’s formulation might provide a
formal underpinning to the realist conception of scientiﬁc theories is under-
mined by the claim that what the realist actually needs, given the history of
theory change in science, is a formal account of approximate truth. Indeed, the
lack of just such an account is typically pointed out as rendering the realist’s
invocation of ‘‘approximate’’ truth as so much vague hand waving.
   Third, as is well known, the correspondence view of truth is not the only
show in town, and it might be asked whether a similar sort of account might
be provided for, say, the pragmatic theory of truth, suitably understood. It is
precisely the latter kind of account that Mikenberg, da Costa, and Chuaqui
claim to have provided, and it is to that which we now turn.


   Pragmatic Truth

We suggest that the three caveats to Tarski’s formulation, expressed at the
end of the previous section, all share a common origin-namely, that this
formulation, albeit a major advance in both logic and philosophy, is simply
not rich enough to capture all the characteristics of ‘‘truth’’ as it features in
both ‘‘everyday’’ and scientiﬁc practice. The source of the concern is revealed


                              Truth, the Whole Truth, and Partial Truth       11
when we consider what it is that is taken to be ‘‘true’’: sentences expressing
propositions such as
‘‘snow is white.’’
Such propositions have an air of ultimate simplicity about them, precisely be-
cause they can be regarded as straightforwardly true or false in the corre-
spondence sense. Perhaps this simplicity, in turn, is a function of the
‘‘observational’’ nature of the terms involved in the proposition, or perhaps it
can be related to the straightforward nature of the procedures required to es-
tablish whether the relevant well-formed formula is satisﬁed by the elements of
the relevant universe of discourse and thus to establish whether the sentence is
‘‘in fact’’ true or false (we shall return to these considerations in chapter 4). Yet
at least some of the more interesting representations, to coin a general term,
about which we have beliefs, which supply the ﬁlling in the sandwich of ‘‘belief
that . . .’’ and ‘‘. . . is true,’’ are not so ultimately simple or straightforward. They
are conceptually open and partial in a way that a proposition, understood
precisely as that which is a candidate for truth and falsehood in this straight-
forward correspondence sense, is not. We take this difference to be fundamental.
    To see what we mean here, and to introduce the notion of a partial
structure, let us begin as Mikenberg, da Costa, and Chuaqui (1986) did, with
the pragmatic view of truth.
    We note, ﬁrst of all, that just as Tarski began his work with an informal
and idealized notion of truth-as-correspondence, so we shall not pretend to
give a formal exegesis of the notion of pragmatic truth; the philosophy of
pragmatism is too complex and inhomogeneous for that. Indeed, it can quite
fairly be argued that there is no one ‘‘pragmatic view of truth’’ common to
Peirce, James and Dewey, say, although with Dewey excluded the elements of
commonality between Peirce and James can be excavated (see, for example,
the comparison put forward by Smith 1978, chapter 2). Nevertheless, we feel
that we can extract the fundamental basis of this view and thus, to para-
phrase Tarski, shall be concerned exclusively with grasping the intentions
contained in the pragmatic position (cf. Tarski 1935, p. 153).
    Perhaps the most fundamental of these ‘‘intentions’’ was expressed by
Peirce thus: ‘‘consider what effects, that might conceivably have practical
bearings, we conceive the object of our conception to have. Then, our con-
ception of these effects is the whole of our conception of the object’’ (Peirce
1931-35, p. 5.402). Note, ﬁrst of all, that the focus here is not on proposi-
tions, per se, but on conceptions. Regardless of historical considerations con-
cerning the development of Peirce’s thought, we take this shift in emphasis to
be fundamental. The notion of the conception of an object expresses an epi-
stemic totality that goes beyond that expressed by a proposition alone. That
snow is white represents only part of our conception of snow, and an analysis
of truth constructed wholly in terms of the former is not going to be able to
accommodate issues regarding the truth of the latter.
    It may be objected that, ﬁrst of all, this Peircean view nevertheless involves
truth-as-correspondence with regard to the effects of our conception and that,
second, such conceptions can be regarded as nothing more than complexes or


12 Science and Partial Truth
sets of propositions. With regard to the ﬁrst point, this is correct and, indeed, we
ourselves would emphasize this as fundamental to the account we are striving to
put forward. Peirce’s statement can be broadly construed as saying that the
pragmatic truth of an assertion depends on its practical effects, with the latter
represented in terms of some ‘‘basic propositions’’ and accepted as ‘‘true’’ in the
correspondence sense (Mikenberg, da Costa, and Chuaqui 1986, p. 202). It is
precisely this dependence that prevents a collapse into some kind of idealism, of
course, and that maintains the connection with reality, suitably construed.
    The involvement with truth-as-correspondence emerges in a further way
that will enable us to respond to the second objection. Switching attention
from the effects of our conceptions to the ﬁnal, or total, conception that is the
goal of inquiry, Peirce famously claimed that different minds might set out in
an investigation with diametrically opposed beliefs but will then be led to one
and the same conclusion (see, for example, Peirce 1931-35, 7.187).4 Hence,
‘‘Truth is that concordance of an abstract statement with the ideal limit
towards which endless investigation would tend to bring scientiﬁc belief’’
(Peirce 1931-35, 5.565).
    This idea has generated a huge amount of debate, but since we are not
interested in exegesis we will content ourselves with two remarks before moving
on to our response to the second objection. Our ﬁrst comment is that one must
resist the reduction of the sentiments expressed in this statement to the thesis
that truth is simply identical to whatever it is that a community of inquirers
agree to accept. The ‘‘agreement’’ and ‘‘concordance’’ are with an external
reality, the nature of whose objects ultimately determines the form of the ﬁnal
conception reached by the community. And what drives the community toward
this ﬁnal form is, of course, the scientiﬁc method. Thus, ‘‘when one says that
Peirce’s proposal is to translate truth and objectivity into intersubjective
agreement, this is true only when asserted in conjunction with the independent
constraint exercised by the real’’ (Smith 1978, p. 56).
    Our second remark is that Peirce’s account clearly rests on a ‘‘cumulative-
convergence’’ view of scientiﬁc progress, which has been widely criticized in
the past. That such a view is in fact false is not so obvious in these post-
Kuhnian times, and indeed we shall effectively be providing the elements of a
defense of it in later chapters (cf., for example, Rescher 1978, esp. p. 29).
    Thus truth-as-correspondence emerges again in the agreement between
these ‘‘ﬁnal’’ conceptions and reality, and in this sense it is correct to say that
‘‘Truth is deﬁned by [Peirce] in terms of correspondence, the correspondence of
a representation to its object’’ (Smith 1978, p. 51). However-and this is the
all-important point-this correspondence is achieved only in the limit, toward
which we are driven by a complex procedure involving abduction, deduction,
and induction. It is only in the limit that our conception of an object can be
regarded as the sum of some set of propositions, each of which is true in the
correspondence sense. At any given time, as we approach that limit, our
conception, expressed by some ‘‘abstract statement,’’ cannot be regarded so
straightforwardly. If the ﬁnal conception is taken to be complete or total, then
our conception at any given time prior to the realization of this limit may be
said to be partial. And because it is, at any given time, partial, it is, at that


                               Truth, the Whole Truth, and Partial Truth         13
time, open in the sense that it may be completable in a variety of ways (al-
though as we shall argue, the space of further development is rather more
circumscribed than some suppose). It is precisely this sense of partiality and
openness that our account attempts to capture and further explore.
    The extent to which truth-as-correspondence also features in James’s ac-
count is highly debatable and turns, in part, on what is understood by this
notion (see, for example, the debate between Thayer [1983] and Moser
[1983]). There is, certainly, as beﬁts an empiricist, an emphasis on the sen-
sible constituent of knowledge, although in granting this a particular cogni-
tive force James goes further than Peirce, for example. However, our primary
interest here is with his concern with the nature of the agreement between
our ‘‘ideas’’ (cf. conceptions) and objects, when those ideas are not perfect copies
of the objects. This concern lies at the heart of James’s form of pragmatism.
Thus he insists, ‘‘Truth . . . is a property of certain of our ideas. It means their
agreement, as falsity means their disagreement, with reality’’ (James 1907a,
pp. 198-199; rep. in his 1932, p. v), and then asks, ‘‘Where our ideas [do]5
not copy deﬁnitely their object, what does agreement with that object mean?’’
His answer is contained in the following:

   Pragmatism . . . asks its usual question. ‘‘Grant an idea or belief to be true,’’ it
   says, ‘‘what concrete differences will its being true make in any one’s actual
   life? What experiences [may] be different from those which would obtain if the
   belief were false? How will the truth be realized? What, in short, is the truth’s
   cash-value in experiential terms?’’ The moment pragmatism asks this ques-
   tion, it sees the answer: True ideas are those that we can assimilate, validate,
   corroborate, and verify. False ideas are those that we cannot. That is the
   practical difference it makes to us to have true ideas; that therefore is the
   meaning of truth, for it is all that truth is known-as. (James 1907a, pp. 200-
   201 and 1932, pp. v-vi)

    Hence for James also, truth is to be understood in terms of a relation of
‘‘agreement’’ between an idea and its object. Where this idea might be said to
‘‘copy’’ or duplicate the object, as in ‘‘our true ideas of sensible things’’ (James
1907a, p. 199), agreement reduces to correspondence, and the assimilation,
validation, corroboration, and veriﬁcation are direct and immediate. Where,
however, the idea is not a straightforward copy of the object, which is the case
with the most useful and interesting of our ideas, the notion of correspon-
dence is inadequate to express the relationship, and the full pragmatist anal-
ysis of truth must come into play.6 In this regard, Smith notes,

   It is important to notice that there are times when James thought of ‘‘copy’’
   as the most obvious case of agreement and he seems to have assumed that
   where ‘‘copying’’ exists agreement exists as well, so that we have a kind of
   immediate veriﬁcation. However, where copying fails to obtain, as in the
   case of the idea of energy in the spring of the watch, he asked what
   agreement means and proposed in those cases to appeal to the pragmatic
   maxim-grant an idea to be true, what difference will it make, etc.-as the
   proper way to determine whether there is ‘‘agreement’’ in a non-copy sense.
   (Smith 1997, p. 211, fn. 39)



14 Science and Partial Truth
(The example of the energy or, as James put it, the ‘‘elasticity’’ in a watch
spring (1907a, p. 199) is signiﬁcant; it is ‘‘iconic’’ in senses to be explored
later.)
   Thus, in his response to a critique of pragmatism, James takes what Tarski
called the ‘‘classical’’ conception of truth as stating ‘‘this simple thing that the
object of which one is thinking is as one thinks it’’ and writes:

   It seems to me that the word ‘‘as,’’ which qualiﬁes the relation here, and
   bears the whole ‘‘epistemological’’ burden, is anything but simple. What it
   most immediately suggests is that the idea should be like the object; but
   most of our ideas, being abstract concepts, bear almost no resemblance to
   their objects. The ‘‘as’’ must therefore, I should say, be usually interpreted
   functionally, as meaning that the idea shall lead us in to the same quarters
   of experience as the object would. Experience leads ever on and on, and
   objects and our ideas of objects may both lead to the same goals. The ideas
   being in that case shorter cuts, we substitute them more and more for their
   objects; and we habitually waive direct veriﬁcation of each one of them, as
   their train passes through our mind, because if an idea leads as the object
   would lead, we can say . . . that in so far forth the object is as we think it,
   and that the idea, veriﬁed thus in so far forth, is true enough. (James 1907b,
   p. 467; reprinted in 1932, pp. 166-167)
In other words, for an idea to be true the object must be ‘‘as’’ the idea declares it,
where the ‘‘as-ness’’ here is explicated in terms of the idea’s veriﬁability7 (James
1907b, p. 170). ‘‘Veriﬁability,’’ in turn, signiﬁes ‘‘certain practical con-
sequences of the veriﬁed and validated idea’’ (1907a, p. 201). These con-
sequences are then characterized in terms of correspondence: ‘‘It is hard to ﬁnd
any one phrase that characterizes these consequences better than the ordinary
agreement-formula-just such consequences being what we have in mind
whenever we say that our ideas ‘‘agree’’ with reality’’ (James 1907a, p. 201).
    Hence the pragmatist account of the truth-relation is intended to cover not
only ‘‘the most complete truth that can be conceived of’’namely, correspon-
dence truth-but also ‘‘truth of the most relative and imperfect description’’
(James 1907, p. 183). In other words, it is explicitly intended to accommodate
situations in which the relation holds between ‘‘reality’’ and ‘‘ideas,’’ ‘‘con-
ceptions’’ and ‘‘descriptions,’’ which are abstract, imperfect, and incomplete-
that is, partial.
    There is, of course, much more that can, and has, been said about the
characteristic ‘‘functional’’ interpretation of this relation and the way in which
James replaces the traditional static or ‘‘saltatory’’ relationship between an idea
and its object with a dynamic or ‘‘ambulatory’’ one (1907c; 1932, pp. 136-
161). However, we believe that we have uncovered enough of the concerns or
‘‘intentions’’ of the pragmatists to provide a basis for our formal account to
follow. Summarizing, these intentions represent an emphasis on:

   1. The nature of agreement between ‘‘imperfect’’ or ‘‘abstract’’ descrip-
      tions and reality
   2. The empirical consequences of such descriptions, understood as
      ‘‘agreeing’’ with reality in the classical correspondence sense


                                Truth, the Whole Truth, and Partial Truth            15
   3. ‘‘Complete’’ or ‘‘absolute’’ truth, again understood in the classical
      correspondence sense, as the (ideal) terminus of all inquiry
    Of course, in glossing over the pragmatists’ emphasis on the dynamic
nature of the truth relation, we may be accused of ignoring or, at best,
downplaying that which is held to be most signiﬁcant and fundamental about
their theory of truth.8 Perhaps some degree of historical distortion is inevitable
if a formal approach is to be allowed any grip. It may be that this dynamic
element is, in fact, what puts the pragmatists’ account beyond the pale of any
possible formalization. Nevertheless, we feel that these brief excavations,
shallow as they are, reveal a set of concerns that can be accommodated within
a formal scheme-indeed, one which can be seen as a ‘‘natural’’ development
of the Tarskian approach.


   Truth and Partial Structures

   Standard model theory has concentrated on complete models, correspond-
   ing to complete constellations of facts, the limiting cases where any addi-
   tions would introduce inconsistencies. A certain tradition in the philosophy
   of language has been cited as one inﬂuence leading to the exclusive em-
   phasis on totality: The meaning of a sentence is equated with its truth
   conditions, and the truth conditions are taken to correspond with states of
   the whole world in which the sentence is true. (Langholm 1988, p. 1)
This concentration on complete models is an inheritance from Tarski that
derives from the ‘‘intentions’’ underlying the ‘‘classical’’ correspondence view
of truth and that he sought to capture. The word correspondence itself signiﬁes
a certain ‘‘tightness’’ in the relation, a lack of any looseness or vagueness or
ambiguity or, indeed, anything that is not entirely straightforward. For how
else could we understand the truth of the proposition ‘‘the snow is white’’
other than in terms of a correspondence with the relevant state of affairs?
    Notice that the characterization of our representations in terms of propo-
sitions; the characterization of the relationship between these propositions
and ‘‘the world,’’ ‘‘reality,’’ whatever, as correspondence; and the characteri-
zation of this ‘‘world’’ or ‘‘reality’’ as ‘‘complete’’ or ‘‘total’’ form an inter-
locking triangle. The proposition, of course, is the unit of analysis of the
classical propositional calculus; shifting to the ﬁner-grained perspective of
predicate logic, the structure of these propositions is revealed, but still the
structure is determinate: Any vagueness, ambiguity, or looseness of applica-
tion lies in our understanding of the variables and predicate terms, not in the
structure of the proposition itself. Given this rigidly determinate structure, the
relationship between the proposition and that which it is about can only be
that of correspondence, a relationship so transparent that capturing it for-
mally was thought by some to be a triviality. And the thing on the other end
of this relationship must be equally transparent, equally determinate, equally
complete and epistemically ‘‘tight.’’
    Yet, as we just saw, one of the primary motivations behind pragmatism
was to accommodate situations-surely the more interesting if not actually in


16 Science and Partial Truth
the majority-in which the relationship between the representation and that
which is represented is ‘‘loose,’’ vague, ambiguous perhaps, but certainly
partial. Both our everyday and scientiﬁc beliefs concern representations that
are not determinate, not tight, not complete; they are idealizations and approx-
imations, they are imperfect, and they are partial, reﬂecting our partial
knowledge and understanding of the world. The notion of a proposition is
inadequate to capture these representations, as is the notion of correspon-
dence to capture the relevant relationship, which the pragmatists called
‘‘agreement.’’ They tried to accommodate the appropriate aspect of partiality
by transforming the relationship itself into a dynamic one, thereby removing
their conception from the realm of the formal, an approach that led to enor-
mous criticism and, for some, much misunderstanding (thus James famously
talked of truth ‘‘happening’’ to an idea, for example). Here we shall retain a
static form of relationship, which will allow us to adapt a Tarski-style for-
malization, while still capturing the pragmatist intentions. What follows is an
informal summary of technical results presented in Mikenberg, da Costa, and
Chuaqui (1986).
   When we say that some sentence S is ‘‘true,’’ we may interpret it as strictly
saying that S is true in a certain structure or model that represents a portion
of reality. In fact, S can be said to ‘‘point’’ to the world by means of a model,
which normally is not made explicit. Let us suppose that we are investigating
a given domain of knowledge D,9 certain aspects of which can be represented
by a ‘‘data structure’’ D. The manner in which D is obtained from D is, of
course, complex, and here we may defer to the exponents of the recently
resurgent ‘‘history and philosophy of experiment,’’ whose accounts have shed
new light on the construction of such structures. Likewise, the manner in
which the various elements of D are related to the ‘‘objects’’ (for want of a
better word) of D is also problematic; it may be that, as Wittgenstein sug-
gested, the nature of this relationship lies beyond linguistic expression.
   If our sentence S refers to D, this is accomplished with the help of a
structure A, which effectively substitutes for D in our thought. Sometimes
aspects of A model D so well that we have no doubts in accepting that there is
an isomorphic correspondence between the two, as in the case, perhaps, of the
relationship between the ‘‘appearances’’ in van Fraassen’s sense and the
empirical substructures of a theory (van Fraassen 1980). (Again, we wish to
emphasize that, strictly speaking, such an isomorphism cannot be said to hold
between A and D, since this relation is rigorously deﬁned as holding between
formal structures only. This is a point that has been obscured in recent dis-
cussions.) The further relationship between these substructures and the the-
oretical superstructure of A is, of course, much discussed in the philosophy of
science, and we shall return to it in later chapters.
   One of the main points of Tarski’s formalization of the concept of corres-
pondence truth is that in order to talk rigorously of truth we require a
language L and an interpretation I of L in a structure A. A sentence of L,
then, is true or false only with reference to I . In other words, truth and falsity
are properties of sentences of a particular language L, in accordance with an
interpretation I of L in some structure A. Informally, of course, we may assert


                              Truth, the Whole Truth, and Partial Truth         17
S of L as being true, without explicit mention of the interpretation, and may
even forget that S is part of L. If we are to be rigorous, however, we must
consider the interpretation.
   Analogously, when we talk of ‘‘pragmatic’’ or partial, or ‘‘quasi’’ truth, we
must also introduce the twin notions of interpretation and structure. In this
case, however, the models underlying the interpretations are not viewed as
completely or exactly mapping the given domain; rather they are regarded as
only partially modeling it. Thus, the relevant properties and relations among
the members of A are captured by a family of relations that may be said to be
‘‘partial’’ in a certain formal sense. A ‘‘simple pragmatic structure,’’ then, is a
partial structure of the form

A ¼ hA; Rk ; Pik 2 K

where A is a nonempty set, Rk, k [ K, is a partial relation deﬁned on A for
every k [ K, where K is an appropriate index set and P is a set of sentences of
the language L of the same similarity type as that of A and which is inter-
preted in A. For some k, Rk may be empty; P may also be empty. The Rk are
described as ‘‘partial’’ because any relation Rk, k [ K, of arity nk is not nec-
essarily deﬁned for all nk-tuples of elements of A; also, in the general case
partial functions, as well as relations, could also be included in a partial
structure. In general, A denotes the set of individuals of the domain of
knowledge modeled in the particular case considered (elementary particles in
the case of high-energy physics, for example), and the family of partial rela-
tions Rk models the various relationships that are taken to hold among these
individuals. The P is then regarded as a set of distinguished sentences of L,
which may include, for example, observation statements regarding the do-
main.
   If B is a total structure, whose relations of arity nk are deﬁned for all nk-
tuples of elements of its universe, and L is also interpreted in B, then B is said
to be ‘‘A-normal’’ if:
   1. The universe of B is A.
   2. The relations of B extend the corresponding partial relations of A.
   3. If c is an individual constant of L, then in both A and B c is inter-
      preted by the same element.
   4. If S [ P, then B j¼ S.
    Loosely speaking, a total structure B is called A-normal if it has the same
similarity type as A, its relations extend the corresponding partial relations of A,
and the sentences of P are true, in the Tarskian sense, in B. Then S is said to be
pragmatically or quasi-true in A, or in the domain D that A partially reﬂects, if
there is an interpretation I of L (and consequently of S) in an A-normal
structure B and S is true in the Tarskian sense in B. Clearly, A is not conceived of
as reﬂecting the (total) structure of D via D but as only partially mirroring this
domain; in particular, the sentences of P should be true, in the usual sense in D.
Thus the partial model A has to capture some fundamental aspects of D, or some
‘‘elements of truth,’’ although it does not mirror D perfectly. Then, we can say
that S is pragmatically or quasi-true in A, if all logical consequences of S or of S


18 Science and Partial Truth
plus the true primary statements P are compatible with any true primary
statement. In other words, we say that S is pragmatically true in the structure A
if there exists an A-normal B in which S is true, in the correspondence sense. If S
is not pragmatically true in A according to B, then S is said to be pragmatically
false in A according to B. This deﬁnition of pragmatic, or quasi-, truth captures
the gist of the idea of a proposition being such that everything occurs in a given
domain as if it were true (in the correspondence sense of truth).
    Let us pause to review the nature of this formal framework. First of all, it
explicitly follows the Tarskian approach to truth, the fundamental difference,
or addition, being the introduction of ‘‘partial structures’’ into the structure
A. This notion can be further elucidated as follows: The central idea is that in
a partial structure, the relations and operations are deﬁned for only some of
the elements of the domain. So, if R is a n-ary partial relation and ha0, a1, . . . ,
an1i are n-tuples of the elements of the universe of the structure-that is, in
the terms indicated, the members of A-then there are three possibilities:
either ha0, a1, . . . , an1i is in R, or it is not, or it is undetermined whether it is.
Thus,

   The partial models . . . all specify a deﬁnite domain of individuals. Further-
   more, they . . . specify, for each relation symbol, a positive and a negative
   extension. The extensions contain n-tuples of individuals, and correspond to
   elements that do and do not relate to each other in the sense of the particular
   relation symbols. The two extensions are disjoint, but do not have to be
   exhaustive. About the remaining n-tuples the model does not provide in-
   formation, Standard models can be viewed as partial models where for each
   relation symbol the positive and negative extensions together are ex-
   haustive. (Langholm 1988, p. 9)

    Let us give an example to illustrate what we mean. Consider a binary
relation R, which can be introduced as follows: R is an ordered triple
hR1, R2, R3i, where R1, R2, and R3 are mutually disjoint sets such that
R1 [ R2 [ R3 ¼ A2. In model-theoretic terms, R1 is the set of ordered pairs
which are satisﬁed by those sentences expressing the relationships between
the entities concerned, R2 is the set of ordered pairs not satisﬁed by these
sentences, and R3 is the set of ordered pairs for which it is left open whether
they are satisﬁed. When R3 is empty, R constitutes a normal binary relation
and can be identiﬁed with R1. It is precisely this which is meant when we say
that Rk is ‘‘not necessarily deﬁned for all nk-tuples of elements of A.’’ This is
the crucial formal mechanism behind our account: the idea being that the
interpretation appropriate for capturing the ‘‘intentions’’ of ‘‘pragmatic’’ truth
is partial.
    That this account does indeed capture these intentions is, we hope, clear.
In particular, of course, the incomplete and imperfect nature of the majority of
our representations of the world is, we claim, represented by the simple
pragmatic structures just provided. It is the partial relations that express what
we know about the domain of knowledge concerned or represent the relevant
relations between the elements of this domain in the sense of those relations
we happen to be interested in. The second and third ‘‘intentions’’ on our list


                                 Truth, the Whole Truth, and Partial Truth            19
also ﬁnd a formal representation within our account. Thus, the set of privi-
leged sentences P, which include the empirical consequences of our descrip-
tions, are taken to be true in the Tarskian correspondence sense, and the total
structure B can be taken to represent the ideal ‘‘terminus’’ of enquiry.10
   Perhaps even more fundamentally, although it is sentences such as S that
are said to be pragmatically or ‘‘quasi-’’ true, they are so only in a simple
pragmatic structure, such as A. It is the latter that (partially) represents the
world, and these partial structures are the primary locus of epistemic activity.
Thus, rather than focus on propositions per se, we shall be advocating a shift
to consideration of the underlying structures, complete in the Tarskian cor-
respondence account, partial in the case of pragmatic truth, which do all the
representational work, as it were. Such a shift is, we contend, crucial to
obtaining a more representative characterization, in the sense of being in
closer agreement with practice, of a range of notions, from belief in general to
scientiﬁc theories in particular.
   Finally, then, the formalization of pragmatic or quasi truth in this manner
removes any last inhibitions on the use of these notions to resolve a wide
range of issues, from the treatment of inconsistent belief sets to the problem of
induction and the question of theory acceptance in science. It is to such issues
that we now turn.




20 Science and Partial Truth
         2
         THEORIES AND MODELS

         A possible realization in which all valid sentences of a
         theory T are satisﬁed is called a model of T.
           -Tarski, ‘‘A General Method in Proofs of Undecidability’’



   Model Theory and the Philosophy of Science

Tarski’s innovation had two fundamentally important consequences (see also
Suppes 1988). First, his deﬁnition of truth-as-correspondence had an enor-
mous impact on philosophy and, in particular, the philosophy of science.
Second, by showing that not only truth but also other semantic notions, such
as that of semantic consequence, could be deﬁned in terms of a form of set
theory, such as Zermelo-Fraenkel, Tarski effectively brought the notion of
model within the scope of ‘‘ordinary’’ mathematics. These two results are both
formally and historically entwined, as Vaught indicates in his brief account of
the early history of model theory: In his seminars of 1926–28 at Warsaw
University, Tarski expressed his dissatisfaction with the intuitive notion of
‘‘truth in a structure,’’ which was typically left undeﬁned in metalogical
discussions (Vaught 1974).1 Thus Tarski’s analysis was driven by formal
considerations, as well as philosophical ones.
    Subsequently, model theory underwent an explosive development, branch-
ing off in a variety of directions to such an extent that doubts have been ex-
pressed as to whether the ﬁeld can be contained under such a simple title
(a summary of these developments is given in Chang 1974; for an indication of
the doubts as to what, precisely, falls under ‘‘model theory,’’ see Addison 1965).
Nevertheless, we shall adopt the position that,
   to lie properly in the theory of models a study should really make ‘‘essen-
   tial’’ use of structures as well as of languages. Vaguely, it is necessary that



                                         21
   the structures (or more general kinds of entities) which underlie the inter-
   pretation of the grammars under consideration should be considered as
   individuals-that we construct them, perform operations on them, classify
   them, or determine relations that hold among them. (Addison 1965,
   p. 441)

It is this ‘‘essential’’ use of structures and their treatment as unitary indi-
viduals that we regard as fundamental; indeed, this view may be taken as the
formal counterpart of the epistemic shift from the language in which our
beliefs are expressed to the structural objects of those beliefs. We shall return
to this issue shortly.
    Returning to our historical outline, the model-theoretic aspect of Tarski’s
technical achievement had further fundamental consequences outside model
theory itself by initiating the development of the ‘‘model-theoretic’’ or ‘‘se-
mantic’’ approach to scientiﬁc theories.2 The twin driving forces behind this
approach were the application of model-theoretic techniques, understood as a
kind of ‘‘logical analysis’’ in a broad sense and a concern with scientiﬁc
practice. Thus Beth, one of the originators of the approach who was pro-
foundly inﬂuenced by Tarski’s work, ably expresses these motivations: ‘‘a
philosophy of science, instead of attempting to deal with speculations on the
subject matter of the sciences, should rather attempt a logical analysis-in the
broadest sense of the phrase-of the theories which form the actual content of
the various sciences. The Semantic method, which was introduced by
A. Tarski towards 1930 . . . is a very great help in the logical analysis of
physical theories’’ (Beth 1949, p. 180). These twin concerns also underlie the
work of Suppes, another of the originators of this approach, who learned
about set-theoretic analysis from Tarski and McKinsey and applied it in the
axiomatization of theories in physics (see Suppe 1989, p. 8).
    The work of Beth and Suppes inﬂuenced in turn van Fraassen and Suppe,
whose books and papers, together with those of Suppes in particular, can be seen
as delineating the core of the model-theoretic program within the philosophy of
science (Suppe 1989; van Fraassen 1980, 1989, 1991). This core is marked out
by a commitment to the view that scientiﬁc theories can be characterized by
what their linguistic formulations refer to when the latter are interpreted se-
mantically, in the model-theoretic sense. Thus on this view, theories may be
viewed as ‘‘extralinguistic’’ in a sense to be touched on shortly. Precisely how
this extralinguistic nature is cashed out varies within the model-theoretic
approach: thus for Beth and van Fraassen, theory structures are captured in
terms of state spaces, for Suppe they are understood as relational systems, and
for Suppes and Sneed, they are regarded in terms of set-theoretical predicates.
The function of these different mathematical characterizations is, however, the
same: It is to specify the admissible behavior of physical systems. Thus, Suppe
gives the example of classical mechanics, where the state of an n-body system is
determined by 6n variables of position and momentum, and the laws of the
theory specify which changes of this state are allowed:

   If one represents the states as points in 6n-dimensional spaces, the theory
   structure is construed as a conﬁgurated state space (van Fraassen). One also



22 Science and Partial Truth
   can construe the state transition structure as a relational system consisting
   of the set of possible states as a domain on which various sequencing re-
   lations are imposed (Suppe). By deﬁning set-theoretic predicates (Suppes,
   Sneed), one can specify either a state space, a relational system, or some
   other representing mathematical structure or class of structures. (Suppe
   1989, p. 4)
The set-theoretic approach of Suppes is in this latter sense more general, and
for this reason, as well as that of personal inﬂuence, we shall follow it here.


   The Axiomatization of Theories

Let us return to the issue-which we regard as absolutely fundamental-
expressed by the question ‘‘what is a scientiﬁc theory?’’ According to the so-
called Received View (the name, sounding today rather dated, was coined by
Putnam in 1960), the answer is relatively straightforward: A theory is an
axiomatic calculus given a partial observational interpretation via a set of
correspondence rules; that is, a theory on this view is a logico-linguistic entity.
The deﬁciencies of such a view are, by now, very well known and, of course,
were a contributing factor in the development of the ‘‘Weltanschauungen’’
analyses of Toulmin, Hanson, Kuhn, and others (for an excellent critical
account of such analyses, see Suppe 1977). The aftermath of these develop-
ments was a denigration of axiomatization in general as merely an elaborate
display of technical ingenuity applied to no apparent purpose.
   However, that a particular characterization of theories and their consequent
axiomatization is faulty does not of course give any grounds for dismissing all
such characterizations or attempts at axiomatization in general. Following
Suppes, we believe that axiomatization is a fundamentally important compo-
nent in the philosophy of science, for its role in introducing clarity with respect to
the basic concepts of a theory, its help in theory comparison (anathema, of
course, to those who believe in incommensurability), for the way it can open up
a theory to potentially fruitful mathematical techniques,3 and, yes, for its use-
fulness in resolving certain philosophical disputes (see, for example, Suppes
1968).4 As Sklar has remarked, in a slightly different context,
   The choice of formalization of a theory is replete with scientiﬁc and philo-
   sophical consequences. . . . Our characterization of terms as primitive or
   deﬁned, and our characterization of consequences as deﬁnitional or postu-
   lational, are decisions that implicitly reveal our beliefs about the limits of
   observational testability of theories and about the ability of these theories to
   outrun these limits in their content; our ideas about the meanings of the-
   oretical terms, how they are ﬁxed, and how they change; and our view
   about the place of the theory formalized both in the historical context of the
   theories which preceded it and from which it evolved and in the assumed
   future science which, we anticipate, will perhaps evolve from it under
   pressure of new observations and new theorizing.
      Given that so much hinges upon the formalization we do choose, we should
   not be surprised to ﬁnd that this choice is no trivial matter, but one that
   requires the full utilization of our best available scientiﬁc and philosophical


                                                        Theories and Models           23
   methodology. If formalizing is to be more than mere ‘‘logicifying,’’ it is
   theorizing, and demands, if it is to be done adequately, the full resources
   needed for theorizing in general. (Sklar 1977, pp. 271–272)5

    It is clear, however, that such axiomatization cannot proceed merely lin-
guistically or syntactically. Leaving aside such well-known issues as the lack
of a sound basis for the linguistic distinction between theoretical and ob-
servational terms, for example, there is the fundamental point concerning the
characterization and, hence, individuation, of theories. More speciﬁcally, as
Suppe, for example, emphasizes (and a concern with this issue of theory
individuation runs throughout his book), on the Received View, the corres-
pondence rules that relate theoretical and observational terms are ‘‘in-
dividuating proper parts of theories’’ (1989, p. 4), as they must be on a
linguistic characterization. Any change in such rules must therefore result in
what is, strictly speaking, a new theory. Since such changes will typically be
driven by changes in experimental procedure-by the introduction of new
measurement techniques, for example-on this view a change in experimental
design must formally lead to a new theory. Yet this is clearly absurd from the
perspective of scientiﬁc practice.
    This is part and parcel of a more general point concerning the in-
dependence of the theory, as such, from linguistic formulations. It is, perhaps,
banal to say that the theory of General Relativity is the same whether it is
expressed in English or Portuguese. What is not so banal is the claim that it is
the same theory whether it is logico-linguistically axiomatized in one partic-
ular way or another. We stress the logico-linguistic aspect since, as Sklar
points out, there is a sense in which formalizing of a certain kind is theorizing,
and we shall touch on this point later. There is a further practical issue here:
Although it is possible to logically axiomatize certain relatively simple theories
in mathematics, for example, in terms of ﬁrst-order predicate logic with
identity, the task becomes ‘‘awkward and unduly laborious’’ (Suppes 1957, p.
248) when we face more complex theories, such as geometry, where we
might want to deﬁne lines as certain sets of points, for example. Even more
signiﬁcantly, ‘‘it is repetitious, for in axiomatizing a wide variety of theories, it
is necessary or at least highly expedient to make use of set theory; if for-
malization in ﬁrst-order logic is the method used, then each such ax-
iomatization must include appropriate axioms for set theory’’ (Suppes 1957,
p. 248). With even more complex theories, such as probability theory, where
it is not just notions from set theory but also results of number theory and the
theory of functions that are appealed to, the task moves from the laborious to
the ‘‘utterly impractical’’ (Suppes 1957, p. 249).
    Finally and relatedly, within scientiﬁc practice itself we simply do not ﬁnd
axiomatizations in this logico-linguistic sense. As van Fraassen has empha-
sized, what are called ‘‘axioms’’ in a textbook on quantum mechanics, say, do
not look anything like the kind of thing we expect from our logic courses, nor
do they play the same role (1980, p. 65). As he further remarks, while the
disparity between such practice and what is typically captured syntactically
‘‘will not affect philosophical points which hinge only on what is possible ‘in



24 Science and Partial Truth
principle,’ it may certainly affect the real possibility of understanding and
clariﬁcation’’ (1989, p. 211). Thus, to denigrate these points as merely con-
cerned with issues of practicality is to precisely miss the point.
    Suppe (and van Fraassen) conclude that ‘‘theories are not collections of
propositions or statements, but rather are extra-linguistic entities which may
be described or characterized by a number of different linguistic formulations’’
(Suppe 1977, p. 221). Suppes, on the other hand, understands theories in
terms of set-theoretical predicates, which, of course, are linguistic entities.
What is a theory then? This is perhaps a more delicate question than has been
acknowledged until now. It seems to us that it bears on the further issue of the
nature of the game that we, as philosophers of science, are involved in. And
this game, at least in part, has to do with representation. If we want to know
what a theory is, the best we can do is give an ostensive response by looking
at practice and taking the examples of what science presents to us as theories.
The question we have to answer, as philosophers of science, is what is the
most appropriate representation of theories? In answering this question, we
must acknowledge that a theory can be represented from various perspectives:
A Suppes predicate, understood as a linguistic notion, determines a family of
structures, which are nonlinguistic and (normally) conversely.
    Representationally, then, theories present us with two faces: the syntac-
tical and the semantical.6 However, no one would think today that we should
axiomatize all theories within ﬁrst-order logic because this is simply not
possible. If we were to insist on a ‘‘linguistic’’ approach, we could employ
either higher order logics or set theory (which is itself a ﬁrst-order theory; see
appendix 2). Indeed, this might be the more appropriate approach if our aim
were to prove certain metatheorems about the theory. If, however, our aim is
to accommodate various aspects of scientiﬁc practice, such as the inter-
relationships between theories and data or between theories themselves, then
axiomatization must be sought, if it is to be sought at all, in some method
other than the speciﬁcation and elaboration of a ﬁrst-order logical language. It
is precisely such an alternative method that is provided by the model-theoretic
approach, where a theory is presented (and here we choose our words care-
fully, for reasons to be elaborated later) in terms of a description of a set of
models in the sense of relational structures for which all the sentences in a
particular linguistic formulation of the theory express true properties about
the structure when the latter acts as an interpretation or ‘‘possible realiza-
tion’’ (Suppes 1957) of the theory.
    We declare, then, that to axiomatize a theory is to apply these model-
theoretic methods. Perhaps the most famous such application is the axi-
omatization of classical particle mechanics by Suppes and others (Suppes 1957,
1970; McKinsey, Sugar, and Suppes 1953; da Costa and Chuaqui 1988; da
Costa and Doria 1992), although suggestions of this approach can be found in
von Neumann’s formalization of quantum mechanics, which also inﬂuenced
Beth (von Neumann 1955; for further discussion of the model-theoretic ap-
proach to quantum mechanics, see van Fraassen 1970, pp. 329–330, and
1991). More recently, one of us has suggested how Maxwell’s electromagnetic
theory can also be axiomatized in this way (da Costa 1987a), and van Fraassen


                                                      Theories and Models      25
(1985a) and Friedman (1983) have applied these techniques in discussions of
the foundations of space-time theories (see also da Costa, Doria, and de Barros
1990). That such axiomatization might have important consequences, both
philosophical and scientiﬁc, is exempliﬁed by the result that including or de-
leting certain set-theoretical axioms, such as the continuum hypothesis or
Martin’s axiom, produces deﬁnite physical results: A positive entropy shift, for
example, becomes a zero-entropy shift (see da Costa and Doria 1996).
    If to axiomatize a theory is to deﬁne a family of models or, more generally,
a species of structures, the question naturally arises, ‘‘In what terms should
such structures be deﬁned?’’ Now, the three best known ways to deﬁne the
concept of a mathematical structure are as follows: (1) using set theory à la
Bourbaki, (2) by means of higher order logic (or type theory), and (3) via
category theory. Loosely speaking, 1 and 2 can be thought of as methods for
studying the ‘‘psychology’’ of mathematical structures, whereas 3 is more
concerned with the ‘‘sociology’’ of such structures! The last method studies a
certain kind of structure inside a given category. We shall brieﬂy consider each
of these in turn (for further details of 1, see appendix 1):
   1. The usual concept of species of structures in general and of structure
      in particular is essentially that of Bourbaki (1968, chapter 4). It is
      this notion that is employed by Beth, Suppes, and others. In par-
      ticular, a model is a structure that satisﬁes certain sentences of a
      convenient language. These can be taken as the standard concepts of
      (mathematical) structure and model.
   2. Instead of set theory, we could use higher order logic to deﬁne the
      notion of structure. This is basically Carnap’s approach (see Carnap
      1958), and it can be shown that his deﬁnition is essentially
      equivalent to Bourbaki’s. However, one big difference is that we may
      interpret the basic elements of a structure as predicates and not as
      sets. In this manner, we are naturally led to deﬁne not only exten-
      sional structures but also intentional ones.
   3. Most properties of structures depend not only on particular structures
      but also on collections of structures composing mathematical objects
      known as categories (see, for example, Bourbaki 1968, pp. 271–288).
      Taking into account this fact and generalizing the situation, Ehres-
      mann had the happy idea of deﬁning a species of structures as a
      functor acting on appropriate categories (see, for example, Ehres-
      mann 1966, pp. 1–7). This categorial or functorial concept of species
      of structure can be thought of as extending the set-theoretical deﬁ-
      nition, and it may be that future developments will compel us to
      employ a concept of structure deﬁned along these lines.
   Having sketched the three most common ways to deﬁne structures, it is
worth noting that we can develop yet another. Adopting a somewhat loose
way of speaking for current purposes, we proceed as follows: We begin with a
Boolean algebra B in which we suppose that there exists an extra operator { },
associating with each element x of B, another element {x}. The following
axiom then has to be satisﬁed:
x ¼ y $ fxg ¼ fyg



26 Science and Partial Truth
Then we deﬁne ‘‘x 2 y’’ as x  {y}, where  is the order-relation of B, we
also suppose that {x} is a Boolean atom.
    Since we have {x}, ˘, 1, v, 0 , and so on, we can introduce as new pos-
tulates those of Church (1974), as well as the necessary deﬁnitions. This gives
us a ‘‘formal’’ set theory whose elements are any abstract objects, not ne-
cessarily sets. A deﬁnition of ‘‘formal’’ structure then offers no particular
difﬁculties, and an analogous generalization can be performed on the func-
torial concept of structure.7
    In what follows we adopt Suppes’s declaration that ‘‘to axiomatize a theory
is to deﬁne a predicate in terms of notions of set theory.’’ A set-theoretical
predicate in this sense is simply a predicate that can be deﬁned within set
theory in a completely formal way. It is important to stress that the kind of
axiomatization we are talking about here is not logico-linguistic but set-
theoretic; thus, as Suppes again has put it, in a slogan widely taken up by the
proponents of the model-theoretic approach, the appropriate tool for the
philosophy of science is mathematics and not metamathematics.
    Recalling our previous brief discussion of alternatives, it can then be shown
that such set-theoretical predicates are essentially identical to the species of
structures described by the Bourbaki mathematicians (da Costa and Chuaqui
1988). A scientiﬁc theory may thus be characterized by a set-theoretical pred-
icate in such a way as to connect this approach with standard model theory:
‘‘When a theory is axiomatized by deﬁning a set-theoretical predicate, by a model
for the theory we mean simply an entity which satisﬁes the predicate’’ (Suppes
1957, p. 253) and ‘‘Roughly speaking, a possible realization of a theory is a set-
theoretical entity of the appropriate logical type’’ (Suppes 1961, p. 166). To give
a simple example, let us consider the concept of a group (see Suppes 1961, pp.
250–259). A group can be characterized by a structure of the form:
AG ¼ hA; ; ; Ii
where A is a nonempty set,  is a binary operator on A, * a unary operator on A,
and I an element of A, such that:
   1. (x  y)  z ¼ x  (y  z)
   2. x  I ¼ I  x ¼ x
   3. x  x* ¼ x*  x ¼ I
   The corresponding predicate is then
PðxÞ $ 9A9B9C9D ðx ¼ hA; B; C; Di & A is a nonempty set & B is a
binary operation on A & C is a unary operator on A & D is an element
of A & 8x8y8zððx; y; zÞ 2 A ! ðxByÞBz ¼ xBðyBzÞetc:ÞÞ:
   Obviously, this is a fairly simple example, but we can in fact repeat this
procedure with any structure we like. As set theorists like to claim, the lan-
guage of set theory is a kind of universal language, and with it we can
reproduce all extant mathematics (and practically all of our scientiﬁc thinking
as well). This aspect underlies the usefulness and importance of the semantic
approach because if we axiomatize our theories in this manner, then we have
the whole of mathematics ‘‘at hand,’’ as it were (Suppes 1970).



                                                      Theories and Models       27
   So, to axiomatize a theory is to deﬁne a set-theoretical predicate, and the
structures that satisfy this predicate are the models of the theory. That is, when
a theory is formalized in this way, the mathematical structures that satisfy the
predicate are the models of this predicate, or the structures of this species of
structure, P(x), or, more simply, P. In what follows we use informal, intuitive
set theory and restrict ourselves to ﬁrst-order structures only, to which can be
associated a ﬁrst-order language of the same similarity type. Our intention is to
take the notion of a ‘‘partial structure,’’ deﬁned in the characterization of
pragmatic or quasi truth given in the previous chapter, and employ it within
the model-theoretic approach to theories. In doing so, we shall not be par-
ticularly concerned with the relevant set-theoretical predicates-that is, our
aim here is not to present model-theoretic axiomatizations of particular sci-
entiﬁc theories-rather we shall work directly with the models in an effort to
capture relevant aspects of scientiﬁc practice.8


    Theories as Partial Structures

We recall that the central idea is to capture the fact that we may not know
everything about a given domain of knowledge D, so we model D by a
structure of the form:
A ¼ hA1 ; R i i i 2 I
where A1 is the set of observable individuals of D and Ri, i 2 I is a family of
partial relations deﬁned on A1, where I is an appropriate index set (this rather
simplistic initial presentation ignores the hierarchy of models between the so-
called theoretical models and the ‘‘phenomenological’’ ones that most directly
model D; we shall consider this aspect later). The Ri, to repeat, are partial in
the sense that any relation Ri, i 2 I, of arity ni, is not necessarily deﬁned for all
ni-tuples of elements of A1.
    The partial structure can then be enriched by the introduction of further
individuals representing so-called unobservable entities and by the construction
of new partial relations among the extended set of individuals so obtained.
Denoting this new set of individuals by A2 and the family of new partial relations
by Rj, j 2 J, we suppose that A1 \ A2 ¼ ˘, I \ J ¼ ˘, and we put A ¼ A1 [ A2.
Thus D is modeled by a partial structure that has the general form
A ¼ hA1 ; A2 ; R i ; R j i i 2 I; j 2 J
or, more simply, with K ¼ I [ J:
A ¼ hA; R k i k 2 K
To simplify the exposition, we have not explicitly included functions and dis-
tinguished elements.
   At the end of his review of the postwar history of model theory, Chang
urges his colleagues in the ﬁeld to study the meaning, deﬁnition, and use of
models in the various sciences and suggests that ‘‘if you like the idea of
putting models to use, then you should broaden yourself and be prepared to


28 Science and Partial Truth
study some very unorthodox models’’ (Chang 1974, p. 181). We do not claim
that partial structures are so very unorthodox; nevertheless, we feel that our
proposal of introducing them into the model-theoretic account is very much
in the spirit of Chang’s suggestion. In particular, we believe that it opens up
new avenues for dealing with a range of fundamental issues, such as the
relationship between these mathematical models and scientiﬁc models in
general, the nature of idealization in science, and the interrelationships be-
tween models in theory development.9
   Before illustrating the usefulness of partial structures in this respect, there is
an important issue that must be tackled ﬁrst. The notion of a partial structure
was originally introduced in the context of a deﬁnition of pragmatic or quasi
truth. Given the fallibility of scientists and the lack of complete knowledge of a
given domain, it seems a straightforward move to regard scientiﬁc theories as
only partially or pragmatically true in this formal sense. However, a funda-
mental problem now arises: If such theories are simply classes of models,
understood in our case as partial structures, how can they be regarded as
partially or pragmatically true in precisely this sense? Such a theory, regarded
in terms of partial structures, could be considered pragmatically true only in a
partial structure! The point is, the models themselves cannot be regarded as
true, or quasi-true, in any Tarski-like account because it is precisely their role
to satisfy the sentences of the theory in its linguistic formulation.10 The
problem actually involves two intertwined issues: the ontological status of
theories from the model-theoretic perspective, which we have alluded to a
number of times already, and the dual epistemic and representative role of
models within this approach. We believe that a partial (!) resolution of this
problem is possible insofar as such a resolution can be outlined without having
to plunge too deeply into epistemology and the philosophy of mathematics and
that it can be arrived at through a careful consideration of Suppes’s distinction
between the ‘‘intrinsic’’ and ‘‘extrinsic’’ characterizations of theories.


   Partial Structures and Partial Truth

As we indicated in the brief history with which this chapter began, Tarski’s
introduction of models as the ‘‘satisﬁers’’ of sentences brought model theory
within the domain of mathematics and consequently opened up the former to
all the techniques of the latter. In effect, the models themselves transcended
this role in ‘‘satisfaction’’ to become the focus of mathematical interest; they
came to be treated as ‘‘individuals’’ in their own right, in Vaught’s words. As
the author of a recent textbook on model theory puts it:
   Thirty or forty years ago the founding fathers of model theory were particu-
   larly interested in classes speciﬁed by some set of axioms in ﬁrst order predicate
   logic-this would include the abelian groups but not the Banach algebras or
   the primitive groups. Today we have more catholic tastes . . . model theorists
   are usually much less interested than they used to be in the syntactical
   niceties of formal languages-if you want to know about formal languages
   today, you should go ﬁrst go to a computer scientist. (Hodges 1993, p. ix)


                                                          Theories and Models           29
The model-theoretic approach in philosophy of science rides upon this move
away from formal languages to structures, but the issue now arises as to
whether this move should be understood merely as a shift in focus or rather,
and more radically, as a casting off of the linguistic.11
   One adherent of this approach who has adopted the more radical stance is
van Fraassen, who, immediately after noting that the essence of Suppes’s
insight was that ‘‘to present a theory, we deﬁne the class of its models directly’’
(van Fraassen 1989, p. 222; our emphasis),12 asserts that, ‘‘if the theory as
such, is to be identiﬁed with anything at all-if theories are to be reiﬁed-then
a theory should be identiﬁed with its class of models’’ (van Fraassen 1989,
p. 222). This brings the issue into sharp focus: whether the role of models is to
be merely representational or to be constitutional, in the sense that the class of
models actually constitutes the theory. The ‘‘if’’ in van Fraassen’s remark is a
big if, and reiﬁcation raises concerns that we do not intend to address here.
Nevertheless, if models are granted a constitutional role in this sense, the
question of how we are to understand the truth, or pragmatic truth, of the-
ories becomes crucial.
   In a footnote to the previous passage, van Fraassen writes:

   The impact of Suppes’s innovation is lost if models are deﬁned, as in many
   standard logic texts, to be partially linguistic entities, each yoked to a par-
   ticular syntax. In my terminology here the models are mathematical
   structures, called models of a given theory only by virtue of belonging to the
   class deﬁned to be the models of that theory. (van Fraassen 1989, p. 366,
   note 4 of chapter 8; cf. van Fraassen 1991, p. 483, note 2 of chapter 1)

It is this lifting of the yoke of a particular logico-linguistic formulation that
van Fraassen adduces as a further reason for preferring the model-theoretic
approach to the syntactic in philosophy of science. Of course, that this yoke
can be lifted does not imply that in set theory we cannot individualize
a theory, conceived as a class of models. Indeed, given any tractable class of
models, this class is individualizable via a convenient set-theoretical predicate.
The truth or pragmatic truth of the theory, in this case, is reduced to the truth
or pragmatic truth of the set of sentences that determine the theory or to the
species of structures corresponding to the family of structures of the theory.
    In a criticism of van Fraassen’s claims, Friedman argues as follows:

   Let us follow van Fraassen in identifying a theory with a class of models or
   structures. Suppose, however, that the class of models in question is a so-
   called ‘‘elementary class’’: i.e., that it contains precisely the models of some
   ﬁrst order theory T. . . . Then the Completeness Theorem immediately yields
   the equivalence of van Fraassen’s account and the traditional syntactic
   account. (1982, p. 276)13

Likewise, Worrall (1984) points out that to every ‘‘elementary’’ set of models
there corresponds a consistent set of ﬁrst-order sentences, and thus it is merely
a matter of preference whether the model-theoretic or syntactic approach is
employed.14 Although this is true for the tractable classes of models, using the
language of set theory, it is not correct in general.



30 Science and Partial Truth
   Van Fraassen’s response is to note that the requisite class of models may
not be an ‘‘elementary’’ class in this sense (1989, p. 211), and indeed this
must be so when it comes to scientiﬁc theories that involve the real number
continuum.15 Thus, he writes,

   Suppose I present a scientiﬁc theory . . . by describing its set of models, i.e.,
   the set of structures it makes available for modeling its domain. Call this set
   M. Suppose in addition that, in doing so, the ﬁrst object I mention is the real
   number continuum. . . . Now, you or I may formalise what I have done in
   some carefully chosen or constructed artiﬁcial language. . . . we can corre-
   late the chosen set of axioms with the class of models of the language in
   which these axioms are satisﬁed. Call that set N. . . . But the real number
   continuum is something inﬁnite. The Löwenheim-Skolem theorems then tell
   us at once that N contains many structures not isomorphic to any member
   of M. (van Fraassen 1985a, pp. 301–302)

The claim here is that we will never be able to categorically designate the
models we are interested in with an axiomatized ﬁrst-order theory, because of
the existence of nonstandard models that must arise in any application of this
approach to science.16 The point, then, is that since almost all scientiﬁc
theories will need the real number continuum, the class of models of such a
theory will not be an elementary class, and thus these models will not be
speciﬁable by an axiomatization even up to isomorphism.
    Of course, such nonstandard models can be ruled out by stipulating the use
of a ‘‘standard’’ or ‘‘intended’’ model. However, as van Fraassen notes, this
method of description is simply not available to the syntactic approach (1989,
p. 211). The upshot, then, is that ‘‘descriptions of structure in terms of sat-
isfaction of sentences is much less informative than direct mathematical
description’’ (van Fraassen 1989, p. 212). However, even granted this point,
this ‘‘direct mathematical description’’ must be made within set theory-at
least if it is the usual mathematics we all know and love that we are talking
about here-and hence must be subject to the same limitations. Furthermore,
it is not clear that we can dismiss satisfaction altogether. We may allow that
in their descriptive or representational role, models offer signiﬁcant ad-
vantages of both practice and principle over formalized languages, but the
issue that now has to be addressed is that of understanding the truth of
theories from this perspective.
    Although one reason for the recent renewed interest in the model-theoretic
approach is its introduction into the realist-empiricist debate, particularly by
van Fraassen but also by Giere, Friedman, and others, there has been little
discussion of this issue except in rather vague and unspeciﬁc terms. Van
Fraassen, again, has at least addressed it, but his view is remarkably sanguine:
‘‘Truth and falsity offer no special perplexities in this context’’ (1989, p. 226; his
emphasis). By ‘‘this context,’’ he means a broadly realist view of theories from
the perspective of the model-theoretic approach, according to which a theory is
true if ‘‘the real world itself’’ is isomorphic to one of the class of designated
models. (We shall later examine in more detail the relationship between the-
ories and ‘‘the world’’ and in particular this relationship of isomorphism.)



                                                         Theories and Models           31
Van Fraassen takes this to be equivalent to either of two formulations familiar
to philosophers in general: A theory is true if and only if one of a set of possible
worlds permitted by the theory is the ‘‘real’’ world, or if and only if the real
world is as the theory says it is. These two ‘‘formulations’’ are standardly given
as competing accounts of the nature of propositions in philosophy, where the
latter act as both the objects of belief and the bearers of truth and falsity. This
therefore suggests a propositional account of belief and-if theories are ac-
cepted as objects of beliefs-of theories, too, but it is not clear how well such an
account sits with the antilinguistic emphasis noted previously.
    Of course, van Fraassen himself deviates from this context in arguing that
it is the theory’s empirical adequacy, rather than truth as such, that should be
our central concern.17 Nevertheless, he agrees that a theory can be the object
of belief and regarded as true or false: ‘‘With the realist I take it that a theory is
the sort of thing that can be true or false, that can describe reality correctly or
incorrectly, and that we may believe or disbelieve. All that is part of the
semantic account of theories. It is needed to maintain the semantic account of
implication, inference and logical structure’’ (van Fraassen 1989, p. 192).
Hence, if we are to maintain the model-theoretic account of logical structure,
we must retain the view that theories are the objects for doxastic attitudes, as
expressed linguistically in statements and assertions. Van Fraassen explicitly
acknowledges that such objects are typically taken to be propositions or, more
generally, sets of propositions, and rejects the broadly instrumentalist view
that claims that a theory should not be regarded as the kind of thing that can
be true or false. The latter has been advocated by the structuralists Sneed,
Moulines, and Stegmüller, who reject the traditional line that a theory is
nothing more than a complex statement (Stegmüller 1979; Moulines 1976).
As van Fraassen notes, the structuralist analysis of theories is very similar to
the model-theoretic, although notably the former retains the Received View
analysis of the relationship between theory and phenomena in terms of cor-
respondence rules.18 To believe a theory on this analysis is not to believe that
the theory is true but to believe only that it bears a certain relationship to the
phenomena. According to van Fraassen, this reinterpretation of our doxastic
attitudes is too high a price to pay, in particular because it renders his own
constructive empiricism unintelligible!19
    Thus van Fraassen rejects this ‘‘nonstatement’’ view and asserts both that
theories can be the objects of beliefs and that truth is a category that applies to
them, while acknowledging that according to constructive empiricism, truth
as such is irrelevant to success in science.20 Indeed, he writes, ‘‘the content of
a theory is what it says the world is like; and this is either true or false. The
applicability of this notion of truth-value remains here, as everywhere, the
basis of all logical analysis’’ (van Fraassen 1989, p. 193; cf. p. 226).21 But if
the content of a theory is to be taken to be true or false and expressed, within
the ‘‘statement’’ view, as a set of propositions, what are we to make of the
dismissal of linguistic formulations recorded previously?
    When van Fraassen asserts that ‘‘the semantic view of theories makes
language largely irrelevant to the subject’’ (1989, p. 222), what he is referring
to is the description of the structure of theories. In attempting to describe this


32 Science and Partial Truth
structure, the model-theoretic approach offers signiﬁcant advantages over
logico-linguistic formulations.22 Of course, to present a theory (note the choice
of words again), we must do so logico-linguistically. That is a fact of com-
munication, as van Fraassen notes, but to dismiss it as ‘‘trivial’’ (1989, p. 222)
is perhaps going too far. When we turn from a discussion of the structure of
theories to a consideration of our epistemic attitudes toward them, we have no
choice but to resort to a linguistic formulation of some form or other. Evidence
for the attribution of belief comes in the form of belief reports that are sen-
tential. That which occupies the ‘‘. . .’’ in ‘‘believes that . . .’’ is standardly taken
to be a statement, expressing a proposition, regarded as true or false. Without a
linguistic characterization of some such form, we cannot employ Tarski-like
formulations of truth, and without some such formulation, the notion of truth
invoked previously must remain vague and undeﬁned.
    How are we to reconcile these model-theoretic and syntactic character-
izations? How, that is, are we to reconcile our account of theories in terms of
(classes of) models, with our account of belief that such theories are true, or
partially true, where this is understood to be truth, or quasi truth, in a model?
The beginnings of an answer to these questions can be constructed by ac-
knowledging what is implicit in the previous discussion-namely, the dual
role of models as that in terms of which theories are represented and that in
terms of which sentences are satisﬁed. This dual role is an integral aspect of
the history of model theory itself, and the difference relates to that between
what Suppes calls, respectively, the ‘‘extrinsic’’ and ‘‘intrinsic’’ characteriza-
tions of a theory (1967, pp. 60–62).
    In the ﬁrst respect, our primary concern is with the structure of the theory
and with the relationships between theories themselves and between theories
and ‘‘the world,’’ understood in terms of that structure. Characterizing that
structure and these relationships in purely logico-linguistic terms generates a
disparity with scientiﬁc practice that verges on absurdity: Different formulations
come to be regarded as different theories and, with the relationship between
theories and the world characterized logico-linguistically in terms of corre-
spondence rules, a change in theory follows on a change in experimental
technique. What is required here is an ‘‘extrinsic’’ characterization in terms of
which we can regard theories from ‘‘outside’’ a particular logico-linguistic
formulation, as it were; indeed, it is only if we have such a characterization to
hand that we can even formulate the question of whether ‘‘a certain theory’’ can
be logically axiomatized in the ﬁrst place: ‘‘To ask if we can axiomatize the theory
is then just to ask if we can state a set of axioms such that the models of these
axioms are precisely the models in the deﬁned class’’ (Suppes 1967, p. 60).
    In this respect, then, models play a representational role, and to present a
theory is to deﬁne its class of models directly. However, assuming that theories
are the kind of thing that can be reiﬁed, to assert that a theory is simply a class
of models is to accede to a strain of antimetaphysical thinking, similar in kind
to that which claims that a physical object is simply a bundle of properties.
The ontological status of theories is an important issue, but, for the moment at
least, we wish to take on board the minimal amount of metaphysical baggage
that we can get away with! Furthermore, if theories are, ontologically, models


                                                          Theories and Models         33
and the latter are mathematical entities, then the question as to their status
becomes subsumed under that of the status of such entities in general; further
discussion requires the elaboration of a philosophy of mathematics,23 which
we do not intend to enter into here. Finally, it seems to us that there is a
disadvantage to adopting such an ontological view of theories-namely, that
one cannot then directly avail oneself of Tarski-like deﬁnitions of truth, and
with nothing put forward to replace the latter, this becomes a serious dis-
advantage indeed.
    So, on our view, theories-whatever they are, ontologically-are rep-
resented, from the extrinsic perspective, in terms of models or classes of
models, and from the intrinsic perspective, can be taken to be the objects of
epistemic attitudes, and in particular that of belief, and be regarded as true,
empirically adequate, quasi-true, or whatever. To say that the models them-
selves can act as such objects is to switch from one perspective to the other,
with problematic consequences: Set-theoretic structures themselves cannot be
truth bearers. This is the problem with identifying theories with such struc-
tures, as, strictly speaking, we could then no longer claim that a theory is true
or false. And hence we insist: Models are set-theoretical constructs, and so
they are, in a certain sense, extralinguistic entities. On this point the propo-
nents of the semantic approach are correct, and representing scientiﬁc the-
ories using such models avoids some of the more problematic consequences of
regarding theories linguistically. From this (extrinsic) standpoint, models can
be treated as distinct ‘‘objects’’ or individuals, in Addison’s sense. We can
operate with models, consider families of them and so on, and manipulate them
for various purposes, such as deﬁning the ultra-product of ﬁrst-order structures
and isometry between metric spaces or proving a representation theorem in
the theory of groups, an isomorphism theorem for higher-order geometry, and
so forth. This is the stance of the mathematician.
    However, in order to talk about models-that is, to develop mathematics-we
have to use some form of language (or indeed, several), and this language must
contain a goodly portion of extant set theory. In this way we can develop a
general theory of mathematical structures, including partial ones.24 In this
sense, then, we cannot entirely cut models free from language, although, of
course, here we are not talking about ‘‘English’’ or ‘‘Portuguese’’ but the
language of set theory. This language itself may be viewed as an abstract
structure (namely, an algebra), and the forms and nature of the symbols are,
strictly speaking, irrelevant. We need only the symbols to talk about the al-
gebraic language of set theory and about sets.
    Nevertheless, when a model or family of models is used as a representational
‘‘device,’’ in the manner in which they are used by the semantic approach, we
can say that the models are ‘‘true’’ as a ‘‘façon de parler’’ or ‘‘abuse of lan-
guage.’’ Underlying this abuse is the following picture: When describing a
particular domain D, one assumes that it is possible to present such a description
based on the properties of the elements of D, on the relations holding between
them, on the functions that can be deﬁned on D, and so on, and that somehow
such a description correctly reﬂects certain aspects of this domain. Of course,
this is a strong assumption, which may turn out to be false, but it underlies


34 Science and Partial Truth
various structural accounts, including Tarski’s. Furthermore, with regard to
the application of pragmatic or quasi truth, there are, roughly speaking, three
alternative ways to view the relationship between some pragmatic structure A
and the particular domain D that it models:

   1. A may be suitable or appropriate with respect to D if (intuitively
      speaking) it ‘‘captures’’ the relevant aspects of D; that is, if the
      proposition ‘‘A ‘captures’ the relevant aspects of D’’ is true in the
      correspondence sense.
   2. A is pragmatically suitable or appropriate with respect to D if the
      proposition ‘‘A ‘captures’ the relevant aspects of D’’ is pragmatically
      true.
   3. A is approximately suitable or appropriate with respect to D if the
      proposition ‘‘A ‘captures’ the relevant aspects of D,’’ when taken as a
      hypothesis, can from a loose point of view save the appearances in D
      (this might be regarded as an informal version of case 2).

Again, we insist, these are just elements of the picture that underlies our
‘‘façon de parler’’ in talking of models as true, quasi-true, and so forth.
    Let us return to our principal issue. Since our epistemic attitudes are ex-
pressed by belief reports that are sentential in nature, we must shift to the
‘‘intrinsic’’ characterization of theories in order to accommodate them. Here the
models play an epistemic role as the ‘‘possible realizations’’ that satisfy the
sentences of the belief reports, and by playing such a role they allow truth and,
signiﬁcantly, quasi truth to be deﬁned. It is important to acknowledge the point
that the fact that belief reports are expressed in terms of sentences does not imply
that the objects of the beliefs themselves are sentential in character. Of course,
grammatically the verb ‘‘believe’’ must take as its object some sentential clause or
pronoun, and this might be adduced as a reason for concluding that doxastic
objects are sentential, but, as Grandy points out, ‘‘This argument is un-
convincing: we could argue in parallel that since every report of what a painting
or picture shows contains a sentence, that paintings and pictures consist of
sentences’’ (Grandy 1986, p. 330). The essential point then is that ‘‘The fact that
in belief reports the content sentences are linguistic reﬂects only the fact that
reports are sentences, not on the structure of the representation being reported’’
(Grandy 1986, p. 323). As far as the representations of science are concerned,
their structure can be described in model-theoretic terms, but to accommodate
the doxastic attitudes of scientists themselves, we must shift to the intrinsic
characterization in the context of which formal notions of truth and quasi truth
can be deﬁned. We shall return to a discussion of the nature of these attitudes in
chapter 4, but for now we simply wish to emphasize two points:

   1. Of course, it is because the theories that are the objects of scientiﬁc
      belief are partial, in the (extrinsic) sense deﬁned previously, that the
      appropriate doxastic attitude is that of belief in their partial truth,
      understood intrinsically.
   2. Both characterizations are required in order to accommodate sci-
      entiﬁc practice.


                                                       Theories and Models       35
We shall explore just such an accommodation in the next chapter, where we
argue that our formal notion of quasi truth provides the epistemic underpinn-
ing for a unitary treatment of models in science from the partial structures
perspective.



   Appendix 1: Structures, Species of Structures
   and Models

Our aim in this appendix is to deﬁne the concept of a mathematical structure.
The exposition will be informal, but there is no difﬁculty in setting it in a more
rigorous and formal framework.
    Mathematical structures can be introduced in set theory or in higher order
logic (type theory). Both ways are essentially equivalent, and one can pass
easily from one formulation to the other. In general, professional mathema-
ticians, led by Bourbaki (cf. Bourbaki 1968) and model theorists prefer the
ﬁrst approach, but certain logicians, such as Russell and Carnap, have ex-
plored the second (see, for example, Russell 1954 and Carnap 1949 and
1958). We shall deﬁne the mathematical structures in set theory; that is, we
shall conceive of them as set-theoretical constructs. We further suppose that
we are working in a standard system of set theory, such as that of Zermelo-
Frankel (Bourbaki 1968; Halmos 1960).
    Given the sets A1, A2, . . . , An, we may form other sets from them by taking
their sets of subsets or the sets of subsets of the Cartesian product of some or
all of them (the Cartesian product will be denoted by x and the set of subsets of
A by P(A)). Starting again with the original and new sets, we can repeat these
operations. The sets so obtained are said to belong to the type hierarchy of sets
on A1, A2, . . . , An as base (this hierarchy includes A1, A2, . . . , An). Thus, for
example, given the two sets A and B, the following sets belong to the type
hierarchy of sets on A, B as base:
ðIÞ A; B; PðAÞ; PðA  BÞ; PðA  PðAÞÞ; PðBÞ; PðPðAÞ  PðBÞ; Þ; PðPðAÞÞ
   The elements of the sets belonging to the type hierarchy on A1, A2, . . . , An
as base can be characterized by their types. We deﬁne the type of such an
element as follows:
   1. The type of the members of Ai is ai, where ai is a ﬁxed symbol,
      1  i  n, ai=aj for i=j;
   2. If the elements of the set Xi have type xi, 1  i  k, then the type of
      the members of P(X1  X2      Xk) is hx1, x2, . . . , xki.
   Let us suppose that the types of the elements of A and B are a and b,
respectively. The types associated with the elements of each of the sets (I) are
as follows:
a; b; hai; ha;bi; ha;haii; hbi; hhai;hbii; hhaii
  Relations are always ﬁnitary; that is, they relate a ﬁnite number of ele-
ments. A monadic relation is simply a set. Functions or operations constitute


36 Science and Partial Truth
particular cases of relations, and ﬁxed elements are identiﬁed with 0-adic
constant operations. Normally an n-adic relation containing only one n-tuple
is identiﬁed with its n-tuple.
    To motivate the deﬁnition of structure, let us consider some examples:
   1. A group G is a structure of the form hA, , si, where  is a binary
      operation on A, s is a unary operation on the same set, and these
      objects are subject to the usual axioms for groups. If we denote the
      type of elements of A by a, then the types of  and s are ha, a, ai and
      ha, ai. The unit set of G ¼ hA, , si belongs to the type hierarchy on
      A as base, and the type of G is by deﬁnition h,ha, a, ai, ha, aii.
   2. A vector space V ¼ hR, V, +, ?i is a structure which has two base
      sets: R (the set of scalars) and V (the set of vectors). The operations +
      and ? satisfy certain axioms, and V belongs to the hierarchy on R and
      V as base sets. In this case, R has to be a ﬁeld, and consequently one
      of the base sets possesses a structure already. We say that R is the
      auxiliary set and V the principal set.25
   3. A topological space T constitutes a structure of the form hE, F i,
      where E is a set and F is a family of subsets of E, called the family of
      open sets of T or the topology of T . The open sets are subject to the
      following conditions (axioms):
          a. ˘ and E belong to F ;
          b. Any union of elements of F belongs to F ;
          c. If A, B 2 F , then A \ B 2 F .
       T is again an element of the hierarchy on E as base.
   4. The set O ¼ hA,  i, where  is a binary relation on A satisfying
      the reﬂexive, antisymmetric, and transitive laws, is called an ordered
      system. It is a structure with one base (principal) set. If the type of
      elements of A is a, the type of O is, by deﬁnition, h,ha, aii.
   Taking the preceding examples in consideration, we deﬁne the concept of a
mathematical structure as follows: A structure is a ﬁnite sequence composed of
certain sets, called base sets, together with certain relations of ﬁxed types over
these sets. Let L be the language of set theory. A predicate, in L, is a formula
with only one free variable. If S is a structure, there is a predicate P, which is
formed by two parts: the ﬁrst, P1, shows how S is built from its base sets (it
individualizes the type of S); the second, P2, is the conjunction of the axioms of
S. P is the conjunction of P1 and P2. Of course, in P there are parameters,
corresponding to the base sets. We say that P(S) is the species of structures on
the base sets of S. Supposing that these base sets are A1, A2, . . . , An, P may be
written as follows:
PðS; A1 ; A2 ; . . . ; An Þ
Then, the species of structures corresponding to S is, by deﬁnition, the pred-
icate
PðXÞ $ 9X 1 9X 2 . . . 9X n PðX; X 1 ; X 2 ; . . . ; X n Þ;
whose meaning is clear.
   S is called a structure of species P or a P-structure. Species of structures
are also called Suppes predicates (see da Costa and Chuaqui 1988). Obviously,


                                                              Theories and Models   37
the same family of structures can be characterized by numerous Suppes
predicates, all equivalent to one another. By an abuse of language, we usually
talk of the species of structures satisﬁed by a given structure. In principle, to
axiomatize a mathematical theory is to get the corresponding species of
structures. And the development of a general, rigorous theory of mathemat-
ical structures offers no particular difﬁculty (see Bourbaki 1968; da Costa and
Chuaqui 1988). Bourbaki’s treatment is purely syntactical but there is no
problem to change it into a semantical presentation (da Costa and Chuaqui
1986; for more on Bourbaki’s work, see Mostowski 1967).
    Let S be a structure and L a language that may be interpreted in S. Then,
if s is a sentence in L, it is easy to deﬁne when s is true in S (according to an
interpretation). In general, if D is a set of sentences of L, each of which is true
in S, then S is called a model of D. By another abuse of language, when S is a
P-structure, we say that S is a model of P.
    First-order structures are structures of the kind
hA; R i i i 2 I
where A is a set (= ˘) and Ri, i 2 I are relations over A (in particular, functions
over A). First-order languages are interpretable in such structures. In this work,
we usually consider ﬁrst-order structures only because the theory of such
structures can be extended to structures of any type whatsoever, and it ex-
empliﬁes nicely the general theory (Mostowski 1967). And, of course, just as one
can deﬁne partial ﬁrst-order structures, so one can deﬁne partial structures of
any type. In this way, we can deﬁne pragmatic structures of any type, pragmatic
truth for sentences of higher order languages, and so on.




    Appendix 2: Axiomatization in Mathematics

An axiomatic theory has some primitive (nondeﬁned) concepts and a set of
primitive propositions, also called axioms or postulates. The other notions are
obtained by deﬁnition and the theorems by proof. From the set-theoretic point
of view, the primitive concepts constitute sets, which are implicitly deﬁned by
the set-theoretic relations appearing in the axioms. In fact, to axiomatize a
theory is simply to present a species of structures having the primitive sets of
the theory or some sets associated with them as base sets. The principal base
sets and the relations explicitly occurring in the axioms (when they are not
deﬁned relations) compose the collection of primitive concepts of the theory or
of the corresponding species of structures.
   So, as Bourbaki in essence showed, to axiomatize a theory T is to formulate
a set-theoretic predicate P. The structures that are models of P constitute a
family F of structures that in a certain sense determines P. In consequence, to
study T we can proceed syntactically by means of P or semantically, taking
into account the family F . The syntactical and semantical methods appear as
complementary. In general, given F , we can in principle obtain P, and
starting with P, the family F is determined.


38 Science and Partial Truth
    We deﬁne P in set theory. In addition, this theory can be formalized-that is,
transformed into a calculus whose symbols have in principle no meaning at all
(cf. Bourbaki 1968). As a corollary, the entire theory of P-the theory of P-
structures-can also be formalized. Therefore, any mathematical theory is
formalizable (at least potentially). However, in normal mathematics, we usually
proceed informally, handling the mathematical structures in naive set theory
(see Halmos 1960 and Bourbaki 1968).
    Set theory is axiomatizable (and also formalizable) in ﬁrst-order logic (it
belongs to the class of ﬁrst-order theories). However, we usually axiomatize
the mathematical theories in set theory, and the resulting axiomatic systems
are not said to be ﬁrst-order since they are encompassed by all set-theoretical
methods and ideas.




                                                     Theories and Models      39
         3
         MODELS AND MODELS

   The Models of Model Theory
   and the Models of Science

It has long been argued that the model-theoretic approach acquires a certain
plausibility from the fact that models are also extensively used in science itself
(see, for example, Suppes 1970). Consider, for example, the following passage
from a textbook of nuclear physics:
   In a nucleus . . . there are too few particles for a statistical treatment, and
   there is no overriding centre of force which would enable us to treat the
   forces between nucleons as small perturbations. For this reason, physicists
   have fallen back on the ‘‘as if’’ methods of attack, also known here as the
   method of nuclear models. This method consists of looking around for a
   physical system, the ‘‘model,’’ with which we are familiar and which in
   some of its properties resembles a nucleus. The physics of the model are then
   investigated and it is hoped that any properties thus discovered will also be
   properties of the nucleus. . . . In this way the nucleus has been treated ‘‘as if’’
   it were a gas, a liquid drop, an atom and several other things. (Elton 1961,
   p. 104)
However, the sense of ‘‘model’’ here is apparently quite different from that
discussed in the previous chapter; Suppe calls such models ‘‘iconic’’ since they
function as ‘‘icons’’ of what they are modeling1 (Suppe 1977, p. 97). Another,
perhaps better known, example is the infamous ‘‘billiard ball’’ model of a
classical gas. Focusing on such iconic models leads to what is sometimes
regarded as an alternative approach to models in science that emphasizes the
role of analogy. This particular line is exempliﬁed in the works of Hesse (1970)
and Achinstein (1968), to give two notable examples, and it may be regarded
as part and parcel of a more general view that claims that the use of models in
scientiﬁc practice is far too complex to be captured in terms of mathematical
structures (see also more recently Cartwright, Shomar, and Suárez [1995]


                                           40
and Morrison [1999]). We shall return to a further consideration of practice
in chapter 6, but at this point all we wish to show is that the model-theoretic
approach can, in fact, accommodate many, if not all, of the apparently dif-
ferent kinds and uses of models in science. It can, that is, if we employ partial
structures, and hence we regard this as constituting one of the most im-
portant elements in support of our position.
    Let us return to the origins of the approach and to Tarski’s allusion to the
future of model theory in 1935: ‘‘Only the future can deﬁnitely say whether
further investigation in this ﬁeld will prove to be fruitful for philosophy and the
special sciences, and what place semantics will win for itself in the totality of
knowledge. But it does seem that the results hitherto reached justify a certain
optimism in this respect’’ (Tarski 1935, p. 407). Tarski’s optimistic outlook was
notably adopted by Suppes, who begins his paper ‘‘A Comparison of the
Meaning and Uses of Models in Mathematics and the Empirical Sciences’’ with a
series of quotations referring to models, commencing with Tarski and pro-
ceeding through physics, the social sciences, and mathematical statistics
(Suppes 1961). His overall conclusion is that ‘‘the concept of model in the
sense of Tarski may be used without distortion and as a fundamental concept
in all of the disciplines from which the above quotations are drawn. In this
sense I would assert that the meaning of the concept of model is the same in
mathematics and the empirical sciences. The difference to be found in these
disciplines is to be found in their use of the concept’’2 (Suppes 1961, p. 165).
    This is certainly a bold claim, its boldness deriving at least in part from the
counterintuition that the kinds and roles of models in science are simply too
diverse for there to be a unitary notion embracing them all, much less one that
can be conﬁned to a formal, set-theoretic straitjacket. Black, for example, is
emphatic: ‘‘I cannot agree with Suppes that ‘the meaning of the concept of
model is the same in mathematics and the empirical sciences’’’ (1962, p. 262).3
In his well-known taxonomy, ﬁrst presented in 1958, there are scale models,
covering changes of scale in any relevant dimension,4 analogue models,
‘‘mathematical’’ models, and ‘‘theoretical’’ models, which may be regarded
realistically or as ‘‘heuristic ﬁctions’’;5 Tarski’s deﬁnition of model and conse-
quently Suppes’s discussion belong, he writes, to a ‘‘different conception’’
(Black 1962, p. 262). Moreover, models are used extensively but divergently in
science, for heuristic purposes (Black 1962; Hesse 1970; Toulmin 1953,
pp. 35-39; Nagel 1961, pp. 106-114; Redhead 1980; Hartmann 1995), for
‘‘existential’’ interpretations (Black 1962), to qualitatively ‘‘probe’’ a compli-
cated theory (Redhead 1980), and to test theories when a computation gap
exists (Redhead 1980). Is it possible that this plethora of different kinds and uses
of models in science can be captured in terms of any unitary, formal framework?


   Achinstein’s Criticisms

The most serious attempt at tackling this question so far has been presented
by Achinstein, who answers in the negative (Achinstein 1968, pp. 209-225).
However, his concern is with the earlier ‘‘semantical’’ theory of the Received


                                                        Models and Models        41
View, which regards a model as a set of statements (Suppe 1977, p. 95ff.)
obtained by interpreting terms in an axiomatized calculus, rather than as a
structure in which the formulas of the calculus are satisﬁed (Achinstein 1968,
p. 228, fn. 4).6 It is worth taking a look at this earlier theory of models and
Achinstein’s criticisms of it in order to see more clearly the advantages offered
by the model-theoretic view, if nothing else. This will prepare the ground for
our own positive response to the question.
   The technical apparatus of the Received View is well known:7 Theories are
construed as axiomatic calculi in which theoretical terms are given a partial
observational interpretation by means of ‘‘correspondence rules,’’ which
function as a kind of dictionary in relating terms of the theoretical vocabulary (of
the language in which the theory is expressed) with terms of the observational
vocabulary. Hence, the following components of a theory can be distinguished:
   1. an abstract formalism F
   2. a set of theoretical postulates (axioms) T
   3. a set of ‘‘correspondence rules’’ C
F consists of a language L in terms of which the theory is formulated and a
deductive calculus deﬁned. L will contain logical and nonlogical terms; the
latter can be divided into the set of observation terms and the set of theoretical
terms.
    A ‘‘partial interpretation’’ of the theoretical terms and the sentences of L
containing them is provided by the theoretical postulates, which contain only
theoretical terms and the correspondence rules.8 These postulates are thus
mixed sentences, containing both theoretical and observational terms. The
correspondence rules effectively correlate the nonlogical, theoretical terms
with observable phenomena. Thus, as Carnap noted,

   All the interpretation (in the strict sense of this term, i.e., observational in-
   terpretation) that can be given for LT [the theoretical language] is given in the
   C-rules [correspondence rules], and their function is essentially the inter-
   pretation of certain sentences containing descriptive terms, and thereby the
   descriptive terms of VT [the theoretical vocabulary]. . . .
      For LT we do not claim to have a complete interpretation, but only the
   indirect and partial interpretation given by the correspondence rules. . . .
      Before the C-rules are given, LT, with the postulates T and the rules of
   deduction, is an uninterpreted calculus. . . . Then the C-rules are added. All
   they do is, in effect, to permit the derivation of certain sentences of LO [the
   observational language] from certain sentences of LT and vice-versa. They
   serve indirectly for derivations of conclusions in LO, e.g. predictions of ob-
   servable events, from given premises in LO, e.g. reports of results found by
   observation, or the determination of the probability of a conclusion in LO on
   the basis of given premises in LO. (Carnap 1956, pp. 46-47)

If T is the conjunction of theoretical postulates and C the conjunction of the
correspondence rules, then a scientiﬁc theory is taken to consist of the con-
junction of T and C, designated by ‘‘T C.’’
    What, then, is the Received View of models? The essential idea has already
been mentioned: A model for some theory is obtained by substituting interpreted


42 Science and Partial Truth
predicates for certain predicate symbols, interpreted individual constants for
certain individual constants, and so on, in the underlying formal calculus. By
supplying ‘‘ﬂesh’’ for the formal skeletal structure in this sense (Nagel 1961, p.
90), it is claimed that the model can give meaning to the symbols of the calculus
(Hutten 1953-54, pp. 293-295). Since a theory on the Received View is just
such a partially interpreted, formal (that is axiomatized) calculus, this char-
acterization blurs the distinction between theories and models.9 The point was
well put by Braithwaite, who wrote that
   a model for a theory T is another theory M which corresponds to the theory
   T in respect of deductive structure. By correspondence in deductive struc-
   ture between M and T is meant that there is a one-one correlation between
   the concepts of T and those of M which gives rise to a one-one correlation
   between the propositions of T and those of M which is such that if a prop-
   osition in T logically follows from a set of propositions in T, the correlate in
   M of the ﬁrst proposition in T logically follows from the set of correlates in M
   of the propositions of the set in T.
      Since the deductive structure of T is reﬂected in M, a calculus which
   expresses T can also be interpreted as expressing M: a theory and a model
   for it can both be expressed by the same calculus. Thus, an alternative and
   equivalent explication of model for a theory can be given by saying that a
   model is another interpretation of the theory’s calculus. (Braithwaite 1962,
   p. 225)
However, although the formal structure of a theory and ‘‘its’’ model(s) will be
identical, as they must be on this view, the interpretation will not, of course; in
particular, the individual constants in the calculus will differ in their deno-
tation (see Braithwaite 1962). Typically, and crucially, they will denote ob-
jects or processes that are taken to be more familiar than the objects and
processes originally denoted by the theory as partially interpreted.
    Let us take the overused example of the billiard ball model of a gas: The
individuals denoted by the relevant terms of the theory are the gas atoms,
whereas those of the model are billiard balls. This is an obvious point, but
what is important here is that in a model the individual terms denote objects
that we already have some degree of familiarity with (that, it is claimed, is one
of the reasons for proposing and using models). Thus a model may be taken to
provide an analogy (Nagel 1961, chapter 6; Hesse 1953-54 and 1970), and
in this respect the difference between ‘‘iconic’’ models and other kinds also
becomes blurred (cf. Black 1962; again, this is something we shall return to
later). Nagel, for example, took a model for a theory to be both semantic and
iconic (Nagel 1961; Suppe 1977, pp. 96-98).10 The billiard ball model of a
gas is iconic in that a collection of billiard balls is obviously only similar and
not identical to a collection of atoms, and it is semantic in that an inter-
pretation is given to the theorems of the theory in terms of the system of
billiard balls such that the theorems come out true under the interpretation.
However, as Suppe has pointed out, if the theorems are empirically true, then
under the Received View (realistically interpreted) the semantic model would
be the world, yet the billiard ball model could never be such. The likes of
Braithwaite and Carnap would reply that this is precisely why models can be


                                                          Models and Models           43
so dangerous: They encourage a confusion of their domain with that of the
theory.
    According to Hesse, the mathematical structures speciﬁed by the formalism
of the theory could be iconic models (Suppe 1977, p. 99) and are essential
components of theories, since without them theories would have no ex-
planatory power. The idea is that without iconic models theories would not be
testable, since the theoretical terms must be interpreted via a model in such a
way as to delineate the kinds of phenomena relevant to it. As Suppe points
out, this merely establishes that a semantic interpretation is essential, as re-
quired by the later versions of the Received View. Furthermore, the claim that
an iconic model is required for explanation either founders on the counter-
example of quantum mechanics or involves a notion of iconic model that is so
broad as to be indistinguishable from that of a partial interpretation. Never-
theless, iconic models do play an important role in science, and we shall
return to them shortly.
    Now, it is at precisely this point that opinions diverge as to the role and
signiﬁcance of models in science. By replacing the standard or intended in-
terpretation of the theory with one that is articulated in more familiar terms,
it has been claimed (by Campbell, Hesse, and others) that a model can con-
tribute to our understanding. This ‘‘modelist’’ view, as it has been called, was
vigourously resisted by Carnap, for example, who insisted, ‘‘It is important to
realise that the discovery of a model has no more than an aesthetic or didactic
or at best a heuristic value, but it is not at all essential for a successful
application of a physical theory’’ (Carnap 1939, p. 68). Likewise, Braithwaite
explicitly contrasted the ‘‘modelist’’ account of understanding with the
‘‘contextualist’’ approach: Theoretical meaning and understanding are pro-
vided contextually by the relations between theoretical terms and the corre-
spondence rules relating the latter to observable terms (Braithwaite 1962).
And that, the contextualists insist, is all you need.
    The modelist can respond that what the model provides is an interpretation
in familiar terms. However, this is not always the case, as the example of
quantum mechanics reveals. Indeed, an argument can be made that the
development of the ‘‘new’’ quantum theory of the mid-1920s and the sub-
sequent claims that the theory could not be supplied with a ‘‘model’’ in terms
of more familiar quantities (hidden variables) played a signiﬁcant role in
supporting the ‘‘contextualist’s’’ view of models. In response to these ex-
amples, where no model articulated in ‘‘familiar’’ terms is available, Hesse,
famously, broadened her deﬁnition of a model to include ‘‘any system,
whether buildable, picturable, imaginable, or none of these’’ (1970, p. 19).
But now we appear to have lost one of the principal advantages models were
claimed to have over theories to begin with!
    From a modern perspective, the ‘‘contextualist’’ account of models-as
supplying just another interpretation-has been seen as too meager even by the
Received View’s own standards. If models are just interpretations, Psillos asks,
‘‘Why not abandon [them] altogether and go just for theories?’’ (Psillos 1995,
p. 109). But that is just what Braithwaite and Carnap do, in effect. Of course, the
Received View’s answer seems too meager by those current standards that call


44 Science and Partial Truth
upon models ‘‘to concretise, specify or approximately realise assumptions about
the physical system described by the theory, as for instance is the case with the
Bohr model of the atom and its embedding atomic theory’’ (Psillos 1995,
p. 109). This is precisely to insist on the ‘‘modelist’’ view of models as models of
systems, which the proponents of the Received View rejected. The instance
given of the Bohr model is telling: As we have suggested, part of the motivation
for the Received View’s insistence that understanding should not be tied to the
provision of a model surely lies with the perception that, as standardly inter-
preted, no such models and hence no such understanding could be supplied for
the powerful new quantum mechanics that ultimately swept aside Bohr’s at-
tempt (we shall return to this example in chapter 5).
     Not all theories are like quantum mechanics, however. Does this account
put the Received View radically out of step with scientiﬁc practice? Not nec-
essarily: As an interpretation, a model need not be sound; its initial proposi-
tions need not be true or thought to be true (Braithwaite 1962, p. 225). As
Braithwaite acknowledges, ‘‘Scientists frequently use quite imaginary mod-
els’’ (1962, p. 226), giving as an example 19th-century mechanical models
for optical theory.11 Nevertheless, if thinking in terms of models is always ‘‘as
if’’ thinking (Braithwaite 1953, p. 93), then it might seem that the Received
View cannot adequately accommodate the role of models as ‘‘a tool of dis-
covering the furniture of the world’’ (Psillos 1995, p. 110). Needless to say,
the antirealist will have a deﬁnite view on this.12 Is the Received View then
committed a priori to antirealism (Psillos 1995, p. 111)? Not necessarily. A
proponent might argue that insofar as an ‘‘as-if’’ attitude is not adopted with
regard to those aspects of scientiﬁc practice that we are nevertheless
uncomfortable in regarding as full-ﬂedged theories, they can be called theo-
runcula or (affectionately) theorita and still be understood in terms of inter-
pretations of a calculus (Braithwaite 1962, p. 225). A theorita can be regarded
as incorporating some element of truth, while acknowledged as not quite
measuring up to a complete theory. Our point is that the Received View of
models does have a range of resources it can draw upon to deal with these
criticisms.
     Nevertheless, others arise once we begin to pay closer attention to scientiﬁc
practice. Perhaps the most detailed set of objections to the Received View of
models has been offered by Achinstein: First of all, he points out, although
theoretical models might be viewed as sets of statements, the ‘‘representa-
tional’’ kind, such as scale models, cannot since they are objects (1968, pp.
230-231; cf. Downes 1992); an example here might be Crick and Watson’s
famous wire and tinplate model of DNA. Second, the denotation of individual
terms in certain kinds of models is not different from that of such terms in the
theories themselves (Achinstein 1968, p. 231); the theoretical model of a gas
refers, not to billiard balls, but to gas atoms. Third, given this, regarding both
theoretical models and theories themselves in terms of partial interpretations
of the same uninterpreted calculus fails to capture the essential differences
between the two. In particular, a theoretical model, such as the Bohr model of
the atom, does not provide an interpretation of, or give meaning to, terms in
some calculi but rather can be regarded as a set of simplifying assumptions


                                                        Models and Models        45
that employs such terms, as already interpreted, in order to describe the system
of interest (Achinstein 1968, pp. 233-235). Similarly, in an analogy, ‘‘the
laws governing one phenomenon are not treated as mere uninterpreted for-
mulas that the other laws are supposed to interpret’’ (p. 236). In the analogy
between heat conduction and electrostatic attraction, for example, it is absurd
to regard the term ‘‘source of heat’’ as providing the meaning for ‘‘source of
electricity’’ or vice versa.
    Fourth, it is implausible to require that the formal structure of the theory
and model be identical, as the Received View of models does. Maxwell’s
‘‘imaginary’’ model of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, for example, is not an in-
terpretation of the calculus of any theory that would be recognized as such
(Achinstein 1968, p. 239). With regard to analogies and representational
models, the ‘‘identity’’ at work here is typically only partial and may hold
between aspects of the system that are broadly nonformal; thus there is an
analogy between the Bohr atom and the solar system, even though the rel-
evant mathematical expressions are formally very different (Achinstein 1968,
pp. 240-241). Insisting on identity of the underlying calculi imposes a
requirement of completeness with regard to similarity that is entirely in-
appropriate in the case of analogies (where familiarity breeds dissimilarity)
and furthermore fails to capture the nonformal similarities that may be ab-
solutely essential where both representational and analogue models are
concerned (Achinstein 1968, pp. 244-248).
    Finally, Achinstein also attacks the view that all models are analogies, a
view he dismisses as simply implausible. Bohr’s model of the atom is a theo-
retical model and not itself an analogy, and although the laws of heat con-
duction describe phenomena that are analogous to those of electrostatics, such
laws cannot be construed as a theoretical model of the latter (Achinstein 1968,
p. 248). Nor is it the case that analogies are required to formulate models,
theoretical or otherwise. Hence the identiﬁcation of the two is simply un-
warranted. We shall return to this issue of accommodating analogies shortly.
    Having considered and effectively demolished what he takes to be the
Received View of models, Achinstein then goes on to discuss the purported
role attributed to it in the practice of science (1968, pp. 253-256). As he
notes, although such a role is often alluded to in the literature, the claim that
models are important in both formulating and extending theories is rarely
ﬂeshed out. When it is, this role is seen to be dependent on identity in formal
structure again: A set of empirical laws is perceived to have the same formal
structure as the theorems of an already established theory, which encourages
the development of a new theory explaining these laws, or a model, sharing
such structure with a theory, may possess further structure that will suggest
an analogous extension of the theory. However, identity of formal structure
cannot be a bridge for conferring plausibility, whether from an established
theory to a newly formulated one or from a model to a theoretical extension:13
‘‘the plausibility of statements must be determined by an appeal to content
and not logical form alone’’ (Achinstein 1968, p. 254). Yet stripped of any
plausibility claim, this account of the role of models can offer no heuristic at
all. There is simply no such role for models to play.


46 Science and Partial Truth
   These are powerful arguments. However, Achinstein’s conclusion that
there can be no ‘‘theory’’ of models and analogies in science (1968, pp. 256-
258) is unduly pessimistic, as we shall now argue.


   Icons and Analogies

Let us return to the fundamental idea that a model is an icon, in the sense of
‘‘literally embodying the features of interest in the original’’ (Black 1962, p.
221). To function appropriately, some of the features of the model will be
essential to the representation of the things for which it stands, whereas
others will be irrelevant: ‘‘There is no such thing as a perfectly faithful model;
only by being unfaithful in some respect can a model represent its original’’
(Black 1962, p. 220).14 Even analogue models may be viewed as ‘‘iconic’’ but
in a more abstract way: ‘‘The analogue model shares with its original not a set
of features or an identical proportionality of magnitudes [as in the case of scale
models] but, more abstractly, the same structure or pattern of relationships’’
(Black 1962, p. 223; our emphasis). The ‘‘dominating principle’’ here is that
of isomorphism (and here Carnap [1958] is cited), but to insist that ‘‘every
incidence of a relation in the original must be echoed by a corresponding
incidence of a correlated relation in the analogue model’’ (Black 1962, p. 222)
is too strong a demand, as Achinstein indicated. What is required is some
weaker notion that picks up just some relevant subset of the relations con-
cerned. We shall suggest such a weaker relationship later.
     Setting to one side the issues concerning understanding touched on here,
let us return to the ‘‘modelist’’ account since it offers further illumination of
analogies in this context. Hesse, in particular, famously proposed a tripartite
distinction between ‘‘positive,’’ ‘‘negative,’’ and ‘‘neutral’’ analogies (1970).
Thinking once again of the billiard ball model, the properties of the balls that
are ascribed to gas atoms, such as motion and impact, form part of the positive
analogy; properties such as, say, color, which the balls have but the gas atoms
do not, form the negative analogy; and, crucially, those properties of the
elements of the model of which it is not known whether they are possessed by
the atoms or not constitute the neutral analogy. We say ‘‘crucially’’ because it
is through the introduction of the neutral analogy that Hesse can defend the
modelist thesis that models are essential to scientiﬁc practice in that they
render theories genuinely predictive: ‘‘these are the interesting properties
because . . . they allow us to make new predictions’’15 (Hesse 1970, p. 8). The
crucial idea is that it is the neutral component that captures the aspect of
novelty; because we simply do not know, of course, whether the relations
expressed by the neutral analogy hold or not, any predictions based on them
will be genuinely new.16
     Dropping the negative analogy gives what Hesse denotes by ‘‘model1’’ or
what Achinstein calls a ‘‘theoretical’’ model, which, without this analogy,
ceases to be regarded as referring to a system different than that which is being
modeled. With the negative analogy included, we have what Hesse calls
‘‘model2’’ or a form of ‘‘analogue’’ model. What is fundamentally important,


                                                       Models and Models       47
however, is the inclusion in both cases of the neutral analogy; it is this which
distinguishes the model from a theory as standardly understood,17 and it is this
which gives the model its ‘‘growing points’’: ‘‘My whole argument is going to
depend on these features and so I want to make it clear that I am not dealing
with static and formalized theories, corresponding only to the known positive
analogy, but with theories in the process of growth’’ (Hesse 1970, p. 10). It is
curious that the fundamental importance of the neutral analogy is so little
commented upon. Yet without it models cease to be ‘‘logically essential’’ for
theories in Hesse’s version of the ‘‘modelist’’ approach: It is through explora-
tion of the neutral analogy that scientists come to make predictions based on
the model and use these to test the theory (Hesse 1970, p. 33).
    Hesse also takes on board Achinstein’s point that the similarities upon
which analogies are erected may not necessarily be mathematical and goes on
to make a further distinction between ‘‘formal’’ and ‘‘material’’ analogies
(1970, pp. 68-69). The former are based on identities in formal mathematical
structure, whereas the latter involve identity at the level of properties, and
here, again, the existence of the neutral analogy is emphasized as absolutely
crucial if models are to perform a predictive function.18
    Returning to Black’s taxonomy, ‘‘theoretical’’ models can also be situated
in the same continuum (Black 1962, pp. 230-231) since ‘‘the relations be-
tween the ‘described model’ and the original domain are like those between an
analogue model and its original’’ (p. 230). Again, ‘‘the key to understanding
the entire transaction is the identity of structure that in favourable cases
permits assertions made about the secondary domain to yield insight into the
original ﬁeld of interest’’ (Black 1970, pp. 230-231; our emphasis). Here
issues of realism intrude again as Black distinguishes between ‘‘as-if’’ and
‘‘existential’’ uses of such models, the difference being exempliﬁed by Max-
well’s shift on the ether from ‘‘the purely geometric idea of the motion of an
imaginary ﬂuid’’ (Maxwell 1965, p. 1:159) to the ‘‘wonderful medium’’ that
ﬁlls space (p. 2:322). In the former case, the model is regarded as a heuristic
ﬁction, but in the latter, scientists work not by but through an underlying
analogy (Black 1962, p. 229).



   Partial Structures and Partial Isomorphisms

Let us now return to our original question: Can we construct an overarching
account of models in science? The clue to a positive answer is given by the
common element in Black’s discussion-namely, the emphasis on the iconic
nature of models as expressed in terms of relevant structural relationships,
suitably weakened to include the more plausible similarity, rather than strict
identity, and suitably broadened to cover similarities in both formal structure
and material properties. It is precisely such structural relationships that can be
conveniently captured by the model-theoretic approach, and in particular,
Hesse’s fundamental notion of positive, negative, and neutral analogies ﬁnds a
natural formal home in the context of partial structures, as we shall now see.19


48 Science and Partial Truth
   We recall that, from the ‘‘extrinsic’’ standpoint indicated previously, we
can characterize a theory in terms of a class of models represented by partial
structures of the form:

A ¼ hA; Ri ; f j ; ak ii 2 I; j 2 J; k 2 K

We now suggest that the iconic nature of models can be similarly re-
presented;20 let us denote one such model as follows:

A0 ¼ hA0 ; R0i ; f 0j ; a0k ii 2 I; j 2 J; k 2 K

Thus A might characterize the kinetic theory of gases and A0 the infamous
billiard ball model. Clearly the A and A0 are not the same in this case, which
corresponds to that of an ‘‘analogue’’ model-gas atoms are not, after all,
taken to be billiard balls in a literal sense. But in asserting that the billiard ball
model is a model in the relevant sense,21 one is asserting that the behavior of
the gas atoms can be represented by the behavior of billiard balls, in certain
respects and to certain degrees (or, conversely, that the behavior of billiard
balls is similar to that of gas atoms).
    This representative function obviously rides on the back of a relationship
between the Ri in the two cases-a relationship that must be understood in
terms of a correspondence between certain elements of the family Ri and
certain of those in the family R0i . In other words, there must be elements of the
respective families of relations that are the same in the two cases, so that A
and A0 can be said to exhibit a certain kind of structural isomorphism. This
relationship can be termed a ‘‘partial isomorphism’’: A is partially isomorphic
to A0 when a partial substructure of A is isomorphic to a partial substructure
of A0 . The notion of a partial structure (or substructure) is so conceived that a
total structure (or substructure) constitutes a particular case of a partial
structure (or substructure). In other words, we can say that, with regard to a
partial isomorphism, certain of the Ri-some subfamily-stand in a one-to-
one correspondence to certain of the R0i .22
    This can be used to explicate what is meant by ‘‘similarity’’ in this context
(cf. Giere 1988). The claim that A is ‘‘similar’’ to A0 cannot be simply reduced
to the claim that the A are similar to the A0 since these are just the ‘‘bare’’
individuals in the model and similarity must be understood in terms of a
relationship between properties, monadic and otherwise. Hence, to say that A
is similar to A0 is to say, at least in part, that the family of relations Ri is
similar to the family R0i . To say this is to say, in turn, that some subfamily of
the Ri stand in a one-to-one correspondence to some subfamily of the R0i . It is
only some of the Ri that stands in this correspondence, of course, else we
would not be talking of similarity at all but rather of isomorphism. Further-
more, the notion of similarity coming in certain degrees and respects can be
easily accommodated within this view, through a consideration of the number
and kind of relations that enter into the correspondence respectively.23 Thus
our claim is that the billiard ball model is an analogue model of a gas insofar
as there exists a structural similarity, expressed in terms of a ‘‘partial iso-
morphism,’’ holding between the respective families of relations.24


                                                          Models and Models        49
    This analysis can be carried further, both in this case where the A and A0
are different and where they are the same, corresponding to the case of
‘‘theoretical’’ models. In the latter situation, both A and A0 will refer to the
same set of individuals. A further variant on this theme arises when A0 is
‘‘impoverished’’ in Redhead’s sense of a model that is used as an approx-
imation to a theory in order to facilitate computation (1980). In this case, the
R0i will be a suitably impoverished set of the Ri; certain properties and re-
lationships represented in A might be ignored in order to give a simpler set of
equations, for example. Continuing to draw on gas theory, an example here
might be that of the treatment of transport phenomena in gases where a
number of simplifying assumptions are made-low but not too low, density,
atoms with zero volume, negligible forces of interaction, and so on-before the
resulting equations are solved. Of course, as many commentators have noted,
one must always treat approximations with care, since they may give radi-
cally different solutions from the original equations (see, for example, Black
1962, pp. 225-226; Redhead 1980). We can accommodate this within our
account by noting that care must be taken regarding which of the Ri are to be
dropped, or ignored, to give the impoverished set R0i . This is obviously where
the skill in making a good approximation comes in, and, of course, the role of
background knowledge is crucial. As in the previous case of similarity, the
‘‘degree’’ of approximation can be measured, in a sense, by comparing the Ri
and R0i (cf. Redhead 1980, p. 151).
    The contrast with ‘‘analogue’’ models is that, in the latter case, certain of
the R0i will also not feature in the Ri, corresponding to the difference in
properties of the A and A0 . Thus, referring once more to the billiard ball model,
the volume of the atoms/billiard balls and the forces between them might
initially be ignored, for example, and the inclusion of these factors, as in the
van der Waals equation, then gives a more accurate approximation. Another
example is the liquid drop model of the nucleus, where the system of nucleons
is given an ‘‘iconic’’ representation in terms of liquid molecules. It is worth
considering this particular analogue model in some detail.
    As is well known the analogy between the atomic nucleus and a liquid
drop was ﬁrst suggested by Bohr and was subsequently used to obtain the ﬁrst
mass formula for atomic nuclei (von Weizsäcker 1935; see also Bohr and
Wheeler 1939). The underlying motivation for exploring such models is ex-
pressed well in the passage with which we began this chapter, and in par-
ticular the analogy rests on two experimental results. The ﬁrst is that, to a
good approximation, the radius of a nucleus is given by:

r ¼ r0 a1=3

where r0 is called the nuclear unit radius and a is the mass number. This
implies that the number of nucleons per unit volume (a/4/3pr3) is a constant,
and so the nucleon density is independent of the size of the structure, just like
molecule density in a liquid drop.
  Second, the binding energy per nucleon is approximately constant over a
wide range of nuclei. Similarly with a liquid drop, the latent heat is independent


50 Science and Partial Truth
of the drop size. In the latter case, this arises because of the short-range nature
of the intermolecular forces that ‘‘saturate,’’ in the sense that once enough
close neighbors have been bound, the presence or absence of more distant
molecules does not alter the binding of a given one. This implies that the total
energy is proportional to the total number of particles in the system, since each
particle makes a ﬁxed contribution to this energy. Pursuing the analogy then
leads to the suggestion that the nuclear forces also saturate in this way, which
accords with the experimental result noted previously.
    Obviously, what we have here is a clear case of structural, but partial,
isomorphism and corresponding analogy, with the As being nucleons, the A0 s
liquid molecules, and the corresponding properties and relations among the Ri
and R0i being those concerned with nucleon/molecular density, respectively,
and ‘‘saturation.’’ Equally obvious is the heuristic fertility of such a model.
This fertility rests, fundamentally, on the partial isomorphism between the
structures, which drives the search for further correspondences between those
properties and relations for which it is not known whether such corre-
spondences exist or not. It is here that Hesse’s ‘‘growing points’’ are located, in
what she calls the ‘‘neutral’’ analogy, and her useful distinction ﬁnds an
immediate representation within the partial structures formalism.
    To explore this point further, let us distinguish among the properties and
relations in the family Ri those that are intrinsic from those that are extrinsic.
The former are those properties and relations that are essential, or ‘‘se-
mantically relevant’’ (Achinstein 1968, p. 24), for classifying the individuals
as A’s, whereas the latter can be regarded as nonrelevant or ‘‘accidental.’’ If
A0 is the same as A, as in a ‘‘theoretical’’ model, then A0 must differ from A as
regards the extrinsic members of R0i only. In this case, we may say that A0
displays an analogy with A, which is expressed by the correspondence be-
tween the intrinsic-and certain of the extrinsic-members of Ri and R0i . How
‘‘close’’ the analogy is may be measured, again, by the difference between
these families of relations, although here the difference will be expressed in
terms of the extrinsic properties and relations only.25
    In the case of ‘‘analogue’’ models, where the A and A0 are different, some,
but not necessarily all, of the intrinsic properties in Ri and R0i will be different.
Here much, if not all, of the analogy rests on related objects in A and A0
possessing related properties; that is, related members of A and A0 possess
related properties and relations in the Ri and R0i , respectively. A and A0 then
exhibit a structural isomorphism. This form of analogy is extremely powerful,
as it allows us to represent a system by a variety of models, ‘‘visualizable,
picturable or none of these,’’ as long as this kind of structural isomorphism
obtains.26 As Redhead notes, ‘‘This is the source of the very important process
of cross-fertilization which plays such a conspicuous role in the overall growth
of theoretical physics’’ (1980, p. 149).27
    What, then, of Hesse’s distinctions? With regard to ‘‘material’’ and ‘‘for-
mal’’ analogies, our earlier discussion suggests that the distinction does not
map easily onto that between ‘‘theoretical’’ and ‘‘analogue’’ models and that,
in particular, demanding identity of formal structure is too strong a constraint.
Let us consider ‘‘theoretical’’ models: Here the ‘‘intrinsic’’ properties of the


                                                         Models and Models        51
theory and model are the same, so a ‘‘material’’ analogy clearly exists be-
tween them. The closeness of the analogy will obviously be increased by any
further correspondence between the extrinsic properties of the elements
concerned. Equally obviously, however, the closer the analogy, the less useful
it may be. In particular, if computational tractability requires ‘‘impoverish-
ment’’ in Redhead’s sense, then differences must exist between such proper-
ties, the price in this case having to do with concerns regarding the
applicability of the impoverished model that results. This ‘‘impoverishment’’
will require corresponding changes in the mathematical structure-else how
is greater computational ease to be achieved?-and thus the ‘‘formal’’ analogy
will be correspondingly weaker. Demanding identity of such a structure would
rule out cases of impoverished models where we might be inclined to insist
that there is nevertheless some degree of formal analogy involved.28 Recasting
this notion in terms of similarity of structure and expressing it thus in terms of
a ‘‘partial isomorphism’’ between M and M0 allows us to capture a greater
variety of types and uses of models in science.29
    Turning to ‘‘analogue’’ models, we can see that much of the strength of the
analogy depends on the existence of this kind of formal relationship between
the mathematical structures concerned. However, elements of a material
analogy may also exist in terms of identity of certain intrinsic properties,
although this will typically not be as close as in the previous case. Never-
theless, this, too, suggests that we should think of these analogies in terms of
respects and degrees, and viewing them from the perspective of partial
structures seems to us to provide a more adequate framework.30
    Furthermore, this framework precisely captures Hesse’s more fundamental
distinction between positive, negative, and neutral analogies as that between
the set of ordered pairs that satisfy, do not satisfy, and for which it is left open
whether they satisfy or not the relation R, respectively. Notably, it is through
the introduction of such families of partial relations that the model-theoretic
approach can accommodate Hesse’s all-important neutral analogy. It is here
that science’s ‘‘growing points’’ are situated, and it is through partial struc-
tures that the openness of scientiﬁc practice can be represented. We believe
this constitutes one of the fundamental advantages of this approach, and we
shall discuss it in more detail in subsequent chapters.


   Achinstein’s Criticisms Revisited

With these considerations to hand, let us return to Achinstein’s criticisms and
see if they can be met by the model-theoretic view.
   First of all, it should be clear that those criticisms that concern the syntactic
aspects of the Received View of models do not touch the account we are
defending. Neither models nor theories are regarded as partial interpretations
of axiomatized calculi on this account, nor are the former conceived of as
determining the meaning of terms in the latter. Second, and more important,
on this account the twin attributes of partiality and openness can be
straightforwardly accommodated. In this respect, both the Received View and


52 Science and Partial Truth
the model-theoretic approach as normally conceived are equally deﬁcient. It is
difﬁcult to imagine how an interpreted set of sentences can capture the re-
spects and degrees in which a relationship between one representation and
another might be partial, but similarly a model as standardly understood is a
‘‘closed’’ structure, insofar as the members of the relevant family of relations
are all known to apply or not. On neither view is there any room for ambi-
guity, doubt, fallibility, partiality, or openness.
    Not only does the partial structures approach deal with this but also it
allows for the relationship to be dependent on both formal similarities and
those that obtain between the relevant sets of properties. The families of
relations represented in a structure are perfectly general in this respect. This
allows us to answer Achinstein’s point about the motivation behind the
presentation and development of such similarities: As he correctly claims,
mere identity of formal structure is not enough to confer heuristic plausibility
upon the use of models, but the importance of content can also be accounted
for on our view. Again, the point is that both formal and physical relation-
ships come to be included in the relevant family of relations. Perhaps the
rejoinder will be that achieving such generality renders our account entirely
vacuous; to that we can only reply that any unitary theory will presumably
be subject to the same criticism and, furthermore, that the strength of our
account will become apparent in subsequent chapters. Of greater signiﬁcance
is the criticism that, as in the case of the syntactic view, the model-theoretic
approach illegitimately blurs the distinction between theories and models.
However, for such a criticism to have any bite, the nature of such a purported
distinction must be laid bare. In the former case, it has to do with the meaning
supplied by the model to the terms in the theory. Such a distinction obviously
makes no sense if the central terms of reference of the Received View are
abandoned. Turning to our account, we are precisely rejecting any structural
differences between theories and models, but we believe that this lack of
distinction can be supported on epistemic grounds. We shall return to this
point at the end of the chapter.
    Before we do, we need to dispose of the further aspects of Achinstein’s
critique. With regard to models and analogies, we may agree that their
identiﬁcation is unwarranted. Nevertheless, they are not so unrelated that they
cannot be incorporated within one overall framework; that they do bear
connections to one another is indicated by Hesse’s discussion, for example. Let
us consider Achinstein’s example of the Bohr model of the atom. Of course, the
underlying formal structure is different in certain respects from that of the
classical model of the solar system-thus, the relevant energy equations have
very different forms (Achinstein 1968, p. 241)-but in other respects there are
clear similarities that derive from the fundamental conception of the electrons
as orbiting the nucleus.31 This underpins the balance that is set between the
centripetal force on the electron and the attractive radial force toward the
nucleus; indeed, it underpins the very invocation of the concept of angular
momentum, which then comes to be quantized! These formal similarities are
fundamental enough and strong enough to support the analogy with the solar
system, the role of which is to put some (complementary) ﬂesh onto the bare


                                                      Models and Models      53
formal bones and, furthermore, that thereby acquires heuristic power.32 In-
terestingly enough, it is precisely in these respects that the model can be said
to be inconsistent (Achinstein 1968, p. 216), an inconsistency that preﬁgured
the collapse of further attempts to derive analogies from the quantum domain;
we shall return to the treatment of inconsistency in chapter 5.
    Turning now to Achinstein’s second counterexample, it is again correct
that heat conduction and electrostatics are analogous but unrelated as models,
at least from the perspective of the Received View of the latter. Nevertheless, the
similarities between the two may be immensely fruitful heuristically, and of
course any ‘‘cross-fertilization’’ in Redhead’s sense gains further plausibility
from more fundamental underlying similarities in the microcausal accounts of
the phenomena. This then is the point: the existence of similarities that can be
represented in terms of (partial) mappings between partial structures.33 It is
the same point that Black alluded to in locating the various kinds of models on
a spectrum of abstractness, and it concerns the iconic nature of these repre-
sentations, the idea of capturing ‘‘the features of interest’’ and incorporating
both the faithfulness and unfaithfulness of the representation. In these terms,
both models and analogies ﬁnd a home in our account.



   The Autonomy of Models

Achinstein’s claim that the Received View’s account of models cannot capture
what goes on in practice has been reprised in recent discussions, with the
focus now shifted to the Semantic Approach.34 Cartwright, for example, has
argued that much of what goes on in science involves modeling that is in-
dependent from theory in methods and aims (Cartwright, Shomar, and Suárez
1995). In similar vein, Morrison has suggested that models may be ‘‘func-
tionally autonomous’’ from theories and hence ‘‘mediate’’ between them and
the phenomena (Morrison 1999).35 The claim, then, is that the independence
and autonomy of models cannot be accommodated by the Semantic Ap-
proach, which should therefore be rejected. However, this claim is false.
   The focus of Cartwright and company’s concern is the Received View’s
account of the relationship between theories and models, which, they claim,
   gives us a kind of homunculus image of model creation: Theories have a
   belly-full of tiny already-formed models buried within them. It takes only the
   midwife of deduction to bring them forth. On the semantic view, theories are
   just collections of models; this view offers then a modern Japanese-style
   automated version of the covering-law account that does away even with
   the midwife. (Cartwright, Shomar, and Suárez 1995, p. 139)
The argument can be represented as follows: According to the Semantic Ap-
proach, theories are families of mathematical models; if this approach is an
adequate representation of scientiﬁc practice, then any scientiﬁc model should
feature as a member of such a family; however, there are models that do not so
feature, since they are developed independently of theory; hence the Semantic
Approach is not an adequate representation of scientiﬁc practice. While valid,


54 Science and Partial Truth
this argument is not sound because the second premise does not represent the
correct understanding of the Semantic Approach’s view of models. Let us
suppose it is true that models exist that are developed in a manner that is in
some way independent of theory.36 Still, they can be represented in terms of
structures that satisfy certain Suppes predicates.
   The point can be straightforwardly extended to Morrison’s account of the
supposed ‘‘autonomy’’ of models (da Costa and French 2000):37 Whether a
model is obtained by deduction from theory or by reﬂecting on experiment, it
can be brought under the wings of the Semantic Approach by representing it
in structural terms. And there is a general point here: Surely no one in their
right minds would argue that all model development in the sciences proceeds
deductively!
   There is a further argument, however, which is that models are rep-
resentationally autonomous from theory, again in a way that cannot be
captured by the Semantic Approach. Morrison insists that models are ex-
planatory because ‘‘they exhibit certain kinds of structural dependencies’’
(1999, p. 39). Moreover, models make these structural dependencies evident
in a way that abstract theory cannot, and hence, again, they act as ‘‘au-
tonomous agents’’ (Morrison 1999, p. 40). Interestingly, one of the examples
given is that of models of the nucleus, where the computational difﬁculties
involved in relating the relevant high-level theory-quantum chromody-
namics-to the relevant phenomena have meant that these models ‘‘provide
the only mechanism that allows us to represent and understand . . . experi-
mental phenomena.’’ (Morrison 1999, p. 40). Thus models are representa-
tional, whereas theories are not. (We shall brieﬂy return to such claims in
chapter 9.) Now, two sorts of cases need to be considered to evaluate such a
claim.
   In the ﬁrst, a theory exists, but the relationship with the relevant model is
not straightforwardly deductive. This is the case with models of the nucleus.
Another example might be the models of quantum chemistry, which, because
of the many-body problem, for one reason, cannot be deduced directly from
Schrödinger’s equation (Hendry 1998; we shall return to this example in
chapter 7). Nevertheless, high-level considerations do play a role in con-
straining the form of the possible models at the lower, ‘‘phenomenological’’
level, and it is difﬁcult to see how these higher level aspects could be
straightforwardly ruled out as completely nonrepresentational. Indeed, Mor-
rison herself admits to a spectrum of explanatory and representational power
as she acknowledges that models incorporate ‘‘more detail’’ about structural
dependencies than high-level theory.
   Second, a model might be ‘‘autonomous’’ in the sense that it is just not
clear yet how it might be related to high-level theory. This was actually the
case with regard to models of the nucleus, such as the liquid drop model,
which were developed long before quantum chromodynamics came on the
theoretical scene. Nevertheless, their development was not independent of the
relevant theoretical considerations at the time, and at best the ‘‘autonomy’’ is
relative and only temporary.38 Hartmann has explored the idea that such
models are examples of ‘‘preliminary physics’’ (Hartmann 1995, p. 52, and


                                                      Models and Models      55
also 1999; see also Redhead 1980). Of course, this preliminary stage may last
many years, and, as Hartmann himself acknowledges, this is not sufﬁcient
ground for distinguishing models from theories. In this work, Hartmann
draws a distinction between what he calls the ‘‘static’’ and ‘‘diachronic’’ views
of models (Hartmann 1995, p. 52). The former describes what models are; the
latter is concerned with their construction and development. The crux of
Cartwright’s and Morrison’s criticisms of the Semantic Approach is that by
being wedded to a particular static view of models-by tying them deductively
to theories-a particular diachronic view is forced, in which model develop-
ment can only proceed ‘‘from the top down.’’ However, we insist that the
Semantic Approach is not so wedded and that the diachronic aspects of actual
practice can be accommodated. As McMullin has noted, it is crucial to this
diachronic aspect that models contain ‘‘surplus content,’’ which will allow for
extensions that, in turn, may be both suggested and yet unexpected (1968,
p. 391; cf. Hesse 1970 and Braithwaite 1962); that is, the models are
heuristically fruitful. It is precisely this suggested unexpectedness that can be
accommodated through partial structures.
    Let us return to the example of nuclear models. Morrison has argued that
there can be no single high-level theory to carry representation and under-
standing in this case, because the relevant models are inconsistent with each
other. In the case of the liquid drop model, as we have seen, an analogy is made
between the nucleus and a liquid drop, on the basis of partial isomorphism
between the relevant sets of properties. In the case of the shell model, the
nucleons are conceived of as distributed over energy ‘‘shells,’’ much like
electrons in ‘‘old’’ quantum theoretical models of the atom. Each such model
captures a certain important aspect of the behavior of the nucleus-ﬁssion,
say, in the case of the liquid drop model, or angular momentum in that of the
shell model. As we have already noted, the role of analogy in constructing
these models was fundamental. The analogy between the nucleus and a
charged liquid drop cannot be pushed too far, of course: If it is to be con-
ceptualized in this way, the nuclear interior is not a classical liquid, but, rather,
a Fermi-Dirac one (for details see Heyde 1994, pp. 191-192). Here high-level
theoretical aspects intrude into the model that Morrison describes as ‘‘semi-
empirical,’’ taking us up to quantum statistics and, further, to group theory.39
And group theory features prominently in the description of the shell model as
well. Here the analogy is with the atom as a whole, speciﬁcally the picture of
electrons moving in the atom, and, more speciﬁcally still, it holds between the
ionization energy of electrons and the neutron-proton separation energy.
Again, the analogy rests on certain crucial idealizations, since nucleons do not
move independently in an average ﬁeld, of course, there being no ‘‘nucleus’’ in
the nucleus (see Heyde 1990). And again very high-level theoretical con-
siderations play an important role in articulating the model. Thus although, as
Morrison suggests, the models may be functionally independent from the
fundamental theory of nuclear forces, this being the result of a lack of ap-
propriate meshing of the various energy regimes, they are not so independent
from all theory. Again, the functional independence may be transitory as
physicists explore various ways of reconciling the apparent inconsistencies


56 Science and Partial Truth
between these models, by exploring the open parts of the structures and re-
lating them to further theoretical ones.40


   Models as Objects

We can also dispose of the claim that certain ‘‘models’’-Achinstein’s ‘‘rep-
resentational’’ kind-are simply objects and cannot as a matter of categorical
fact be represented in terms of sets of statements or otherwise.41 Of course, at one
level, these models are simply what they are: bits of wire and tinplate, or brightly
colored balls held together by plastic rods. The obvious, but important, move is
to ask what their function is, and this is equally clear: It is to represent. The
famous Crick and Watson model represents, not just a particular example of
DNA but all DNA (of that kind); likewise, the function of the colored-balls-and-
plastic-rods model of benzene, gathering dust in the school laboratory, is to
represent, not a particular molecule, but all molecules of benzene.42 And this
function, as should now be clear, can easily be captured by the semantic view.
    What these models represent is the structure of the entity concerned and
they can be accommodated in the same manner as iconic models described
previously, through an emphasis on the relevant set of relations, holding
between, for example, the appropriate set of atoms. Again, not all of the R0i
describing the structural characteristics of the model will correspond with the
Ri of the entity, and vice versa, depending on the accuracy of the model. But
what is important, of course, is the existence of what we have called the
‘‘partial isomorphism’’ between the model and the modeled.43
    It is worth considering in this context what Griesemer calls ‘‘remnant’’
models, whose function is to act as a taxonomic exemplar (Griesemer 1990).
Thus, when it is asked what are the characteristics of a particular species-
plant or animal-the exemplar can be presented,44 in much the same way as
when it is asked what are the characteristics of a simple harmonic oscillator in
physics, presentation can be made of a simple pendulum or weight on a
spring. The latter can be presented in the form of a diagram or in the form of a
constructed artifact-the ubiquitous simple pendulum of high school physics
labs. Of course, there are certain advantages to presenting a taxonomic ex-
emplar in three dimensions, but such advantages also accrue to holograms,
for example.45 The point, of course, is that the speciﬁc material of the model is
irrelevant; rather, it is the structural representation, in two or three dimen-
sions, that is all important.
    Following Kuhn, the ubiquity and importance of exemplars, both peda-
gogically and heuristically, have been emphasized by Giere, precisely in the
context of (his version of) the semantic view (Giere 1988). It is worth noting the
functional importance of approximation in this context: Exemplars such as the
simple pendulum can be regarded as essentially forms of Redhead’s ‘‘im-
poverished’’ models, rendered tractable for pedagogic purposes (cf. Hutten
1953-54, pp. 287ff.). Although remnant models, like museum specimens, may
not satisfy quantitative laws and so the notion of strict calculational tractability
might be inapplicable, they may be regarded as satisfying qualitative biological


                                                        Models and Models        57
or, more speciﬁcally, taxonomic laws, which may also express a degree of
approximation. Just as certain properties of the pendulum exemplar-the color
of the bob, for example-are typically left out of the representation, so certain
aspects of the remnant model might be regarded as irrelevant-the particular
height of a given specimen, for example. Furthermore, and perhaps more in-
terestingly, just as frictional forces are omitted in the description of a simple
pendulum, so certain properties of the species represented by a museum spec-
imen might be ignored-at least at the simplest level of description.
    What we are trying to emphasize is, again, the twin importance of struc-
ture and approximation-that is, the necessity of limited unfaithfulness-in
the effective employment of such models to represent species. Both aspects are
captured, we claim, by the sort of approach we are outlining here: the
structure by a family of relations, the approximation by introducing appro-
priate partiality into such families, and relating the model to the modeled via
partial isomorphisms. Perhaps we should leave the ﬁnal word to Suppes:
   The orbital theory of an atom is formulated as a theory. The question then
   arises, does a possible realization of this theory in terms of entities deﬁned in
   close connection with experiments actually constitute a model of the theory,
   or, put another way which is perhaps simpler, do models of an orbital
   theory correspond well to data obtained from physical experiments with
   atomic phenomena? It is true that many physicists want to think of a model
   of the orbital theory of the atom as being more than a certain kind of set-
   theoretical entity. They envisage it as a very concrete physical thing built on
   the analogy of the solar system. I think it is important to point out that there
   is no real incompatibility in these two viewpoints. To deﬁne formally a
   model as a set-theoretical entity which is a certain kind of ordered tuple
   consisting of a set of objects and relations and operations on these objects is
   not to rule out the physical model of the kind which is appealing to phys-
   icists, for the physical model may be simply taken to deﬁne the set of objects
   in the set-theoretical model. (1961, pp. 166-167)46



   Theories and Models

Let us now turn to the further criticism of the earlier Received, or ‘‘seman-
tical,’’ view-namely, that it blurs the distinction between models and theories
‘‘per se.’’ As we have already remarked, here issues of realism versus em-
piricism impinge, and not surprisingly it proves difﬁcult to steer a neutral
course in this debate.47 From the realist perspective, as standardly understood,
the difference between theories and models is simply that the former are, if not
true per se, then candidates for truth, at least, whereas the latter are not even
that (Redhead 1980; Suppe 1989, pp. 425-426).48 The acuteness of the point
can be seen by dragging out, yet again, the billiard ball model of a gas: On the
one hand, it is clearly an ‘‘analogue’’ model, offering an iconic representation
of the system of interest; on the other, it may be regarded as giving a semantic
interpretation to the kinetic theory in terms of a system of billiard balls so that
the theorems of the theory are true under this interpretation. As far as the


58 Science and Partial Truth
realist is concerned, the model taken in the latter sense is supposed to say
‘‘how the world is,’’ whereas the analogue model does not, in the usual dis-
cussions of these matters (cf. Suppe 1977, pp. 97-98).
    This is no problem at all for the empiricist, of course, who at best adopts an
agnostic attitude toward the set of individuals introduced in both theories and
models and thus can maintain the identiﬁcation of the latter. From this per-
spective, all theories can be regarded as essentially iconic models of the
phenomena (see, for example, van Fraassen 1985b; Pérez Ransanz 1985;
Olivé 1985). Of course, said empiricist would not take this to imply that
theories are false, only that they remain empirically adequate. Nevertheless,
the ‘‘appearances,’’ understood as models of the phenomena, which are em-
bedded in the theoretical structures, are to be regarded as true in the corre-
spondence sense.49 Similarly, Cartwright has argued that whereas low-level
phenomenological models represent, and are therefore true, but do not ex-
plain, theories explain but do not represent and are therefore false (1983).50
What is common, then, to Redhead, Suppe, van Fraassen, and Cartwright, is
that differences between theories and certain kinds of models, at least, are
drawn in terms of some form of epistemic distinction: In the case of Redhead
and Suppe, it is a distinction between truth and falsity, whereas in the case of
van Fraassen and Cartwright, it is a distinction between truth, where models
of phenomena or phenomenological models, respectively, are concerned, and
empirical adequacy for van Fraassen and outright falsity for Cartwright,
where ‘‘theoretical’’ models are concerned. However, such sharp distinctions
are unwarranted, as we shall now suggest.
    Our discussion of the nature and diversity of models was presented within
the framework of what we earlier called the ‘‘extrinsic characterization’’ of
theories. Turning to the ‘‘intrinsic’’ perspective, our claim is that theories
should be regarded as partially true only and that this captures the epistemic
attitudes of scientists themselves. Insofar as this is one of the central claims of
our work and will be further supported in subsequent chapters, what we have
to say here must be viewed as a kind of promissory note only. Our central
claim is that insofar as theories have empirical support, they can be regarded
as quasi-true, in the sense articulated in chapter 1. The nature of this support
consists of a complex series of connections between an equally, or perhaps
consequently, complex hierarchy of models, running from ‘‘data’’ models and
‘‘phenomenological’’ models to their ‘‘high-level’’ theoretical counterparts.
These connections can then be represented in terms of partial isomorphisms
holding between families of partial relations in the structures constituting
these models. It is precisely here that our extrinsic characterization supports
our intrinsic one, and given this nexus of partial relationships, any epistemic
cutoff point between phenomenological and theoretical models, whether the
latter are regarded as merely empirically adequate or outright false,51 is
simply unwarranted. The openness to further development of theories can
then be captured, extrinsically, in terms of these partial structures.
    The same can be said of models and analogies.52 In particular, the location
of the ‘‘growing points’’ of a theory within the ‘‘neutral analogy’’ also ﬁnds a
natural home in our account. Switching to the intrinsic characterization, it is


                                                        Models and Models       59
implausible and unwarranted from a pragmatist perspective to dismiss ana-
logue models and the like as literally false, for how can they be so regarded
and still function as models? If the model is ‘‘parasitic’’ on the theory in the
sense of being a model of the theoretical core, then if the theory is ‘‘true,’’ in
whatever sense, or at least partially so, the model must ‘‘pick up’’ some of this
truth. That is, there must be something true about the model for it to work in
the ﬁrst place; it is pragmatically true.
    The root of the difﬁculty here is the same as that which afﬂicts the realist-
empiricist debate as standardly conceived: the indiscriminate use of the ‘‘lit-
eral’’ or ‘‘correspondence’’ view of truth, which ends up painting the picture
in stark, black-and-white terms. Obviously, the model must be true in some
respects and false in others-Gas atoms are not billiard balls, yet some of the
relationships between the former can be ‘‘mapped’’ by relationships between
the latter, at least in the context of classical mechanics-and it is precisely this
which is captured by the notion of quasi truth. This new way of conceiving of
the model-theoretic approach allows us to respond to a ﬁnal burst of criticism.
    Bunge has argued that the ‘‘metascientiﬁc’’ conception of model cannot be
identiﬁed with the semantic one for two reasons (Bunge 1973, pp. 110-
113).53 The ﬁrst is that ‘‘not all theoretical models have been subjected to
tests for truth: consequently they cannot all be assigned a truth value’’ (p.
111). However, if a model has not yet been ‘‘subjected to a test for truth,’’
then it must be languishing in what is sometimes referred to as the ‘‘domain of
discovery,’’ and as we shall subsequently argue, it is appropriate to regard
models and theories as partially true in this case as well. This brings us nicely
on to Bunge’s second point, which is that ‘‘every tested theoretical model
proves to be at best partially true in the sense that, with toil and luck, some of
its testable statements turn out to be approximately true. Therefore, no the-
oretical model is, strictly speaking, a model in the model-theoretic sense, for
this requires the exact satisfaction of every formula in the theory’’ (p. 111).54
Of course, we agree with the premise but deny the conclusion! Broadening the
‘‘model-theoretic sense’’ of model through the introduction of partial struc-
tures allows us to accommodate the ‘‘partial’’ satisfaction of only some of the
formula ‘‘in’’ the theory. Interestingly enough, Bunge goes on to suggest that
‘‘a theoretical model that has been given a pass mark constitutes a quasimodel
of its underlying formalism. But this semantic concept of quasimodel has yet
to be elucidated’’ (p. 111; his emphasis; see also p. 113). To which we can
only add-until now!
    The upshot of our response to these criticisms is that from both the extrinsic
and intrinsic perspectives, the distinction between models and theories ‘‘per se’’
dissolves. What we have in scientiﬁc practice are a variety of structures, sup-
porting a complex web of relationships; some of these structures get described as
theories, others as models;55 some of the latter are described as ‘‘theoretical,’’
others as ‘‘phenomenological’’; and the differences are, at best, differences in
degree of partiality only.56 In all cases, they are representational structures, and
it is this aspect which the model-theoretic approach is designed to capture.57




60 Science and Partial Truth
         4
         ACCEPTANCE, BELIEF,
         AND COMMITMENT

   Belief and Acceptance

Writing in the aftermath of the collapse of falsiﬁcationism, Post insisted that
‘‘acceptance, rather than rejection is the more remarkable exercise of scientiﬁc
judgement’’ (Post 1971, p. 253). It is, perhaps, just as remarkable that, within
the philosophy of science, the nature of acceptance and, in particular, its
relationship to belief have not received the analysis and consideration they
deserve. Our suspicion is that it is for this reason that, in the case of many
issues within the ﬁeld, the participants often seem to be talking past one
another. This is nowhere more evident than in the realism-empiricism debate,
for example, where, as we shall see in chapter 8, the realist typically argues
that to accept a theory is to believe that it is true, whereas the constructive
empiricist insists that to accept a theory is to believe it to be empirically
adequate only. However, the central importance of ‘‘acceptance’’ goes beyond
this particular debate to the characterization of scientiﬁc practice itself. Typ-
ically this practice is conceptually divided into distinct domains, as the de-
velopment of a scientiﬁc theory passes from the initial discovery, into pursuit,
and culminating in justiﬁcation. And it is in terms of ‘‘acceptance’’ that the
boundaries between these domains are delineated. Thus, many commentators
subscribe to a holdover from positivism, according to which, within the do-
main of justiﬁcation, theories are accepted as true, or empirically adequate, or
whatever, whereas within the domain (or domains) of discovery and pursuit
they are, at best, merely ‘‘entertained,’’ to use a recent suggestion. Aban-
doning unconditional assent in the latter domain(s) is then taken to license
the importation of sociological or psychological criteria of theory pursuit and
discovery.
    Like many before us (including Post), we shall be questioning this distinc-
tion but in a somewhat roundabout manner that allows for the possibility that


                                       61
discovery and pursuit may possess sufﬁcient structure to rule out as un-
necessary nonepistemic or ‘‘cultural’’ factors. If, as we claim, we are justiﬁed in
accepting theories, not as true in the simple correspondence sense, but as
provisionally or partially true only, then the need for an alternate to denote the
attitude adopted in discovery or pursuit simply evaporates. Thus, our aim in
this chapter is to lay down the framework for a view of acceptance that is broad
enough to accommodate the various senses in which quantum ﬁeld theory is
currently accepted, Newtonian mechanics is accepted within a limited domain,
and Bohr’s theory of the atom was accepted only provisionally.
    The latter two examples are particularly interesting, given that Newtonian
mechanics is strictly empirically false and Bohr’s theory was, famously, in-
consistent. We shall begin by attempting to articulate the sense in which they
can be said to be ‘‘accepted’’ in terms of an attitude of commitment that dis-
tinguishes acceptance from mere ‘‘factual’’ belief. This will provide the philo-
sophical ‘‘ﬂesh’’ on our underlying formal framework of quasi truth. Thus, our
focus will switch from the extrinsic relations between models to what we have
called the ‘‘intrinsic perspective,’’ although extrinsic considerations will not be
entirely shunted aside.
    The fundamental question that we are concerned with, then, is what is the
nature of this attitude of acceptance? The various answers that have been
given can be placed on a spectrum relating acceptance with belief. At one
extreme, we have the position that to accept a theory is to believe it to be true,
in the correspondence sense of truth. However, simple reﬂection upon the
historical record suggests that even the best scientiﬁc theories currently ac-
cepted will someday come to be rejected as false, which encourages a degree of
fallibilism even among the ‘‘naive’’ realists (we shall return to this issue in
chapter 8). Indeed, the latter prefer to talk of the ‘‘approximate truth’’ of
‘‘mature’’ theories and thereby face the scorn of those who demand a formal
explication of this notion (see Laudan 1996, p. 119, for example).
    Alternatively, constructive empiricism retains the connection between
acceptance and belief but, at the theoretical level, restricts the latter to belief
in the empirical adequacy of the theory only (van Fraassen, 1980). Given the
existence of an isomorphism between the ‘‘phenomena’’ and the empirical
substructures, the latter can be regarded as true in the correspondence sense,
but the theoretical superstructure cannot because, it is claimed, these sub-
structures can be embedded in a variety of alternative superstructures (again,
we shall subject this ‘‘underdetermination’’ to a more detailed analysis in
chapter 8). Thus the belief in the latter is weaker and tied to their empirical
adequacy only. This, too, may be understood in terms of quasi truth, but
again our intention is not to go into details here.
    One way of responding to constructive empiricism is precisely to question
this conception of acceptance as belief in the empirical adequacy of a theory.
Horwich, for example, has argued that there is, in fact, no real difference
between believing a theory and accepting it in the sense of being disposed to
use it to make predictions, design experiments, and so on (Horwich, 1991; see
also Mitchell 1988). Since the latter is precisely the sense in which the con-
structive empiricists understand acceptance, the distinction on which their


62 Science and Partial Truth
philosophy is based is one, he claims, that is without a difference. According
to Horwich, to believe a theory is the same as being disposed to act as if it were
true. This is to adopt a behavioristic construction of ‘‘x believes that p.’’ But, it
might be asked, why not adopt the disposition-to-explicit-assent or the com-
mitment-to-assent constructions?1 The former approach, in particular, can
accommodate situations where a scientist might use a theory to make pre-
dictions, design experiments, and the like, and therefore accept it, but would
withhold her complete assent, for various reasons, including the very good
one given before in response to the ﬁrst answer. Indeed, we would claim that
such situations are the rule rather than the exception in science.
   A more radical answer to our original question than any of these cuts the
connection between belief and acceptance entirely. Cohen, for example, has
drawn a sharp distinction between the two: With regard to belief, he agrees
with Hume that it is essentially passive and involuntary in nature. Con-
cerning acceptance, however, he adopts a Kantian approach in arguing that it
involves a conscious and voluntary choice (Cohen 1989). Beliefs come over us
‘‘willy-nilly,’’ whereas acceptance involves an element of commitment.2 More
speciﬁcally, when we accept a proposition, hypothesis, or whatever, we com-
mit ourselves to ‘‘going along with that proposition (either for the long term
or for immediate purposes only) as a premiss in some or all contexts for one’s
own and others’ proofs, argumentations, inferences, deliberations, etc.’’
(Cohen 1989, p. 368). With regard to the acceptance of theories in particular,
Cohen counsels the scientist to dispense with belief in the truth of hypotheses
completely and rest content with accepting them:
   Scientiﬁc enquiry, whether in pursuit of empirical uniformities or of theo-
   retical explanations, is not to be regarded as a procedure that is con-
   summated when justiﬁable beliefs, with appropriate content, arise in or
   come over those engaged, who have meanwhile been waiting patiently for
   this to happen to them. Guesses and hunches, welling up from the sub-
   conscious, may make a very considerable contribution to the progress of an
   enquiry. In some cases an early conviction that p may even usefully fortify a
   scientist’s resolution to seek those research facilities that are necessary in
   order to test whether p. But the culmination envisaged-the culmination
   that adds to our resources for explanation, prediction, technology, or fur-
   ther research-is a conscious and voluntary act of appropriately reasoned
   acceptance that is echoed throughout the relevant scientiﬁc community.
   (Cohen 1989, p. 385)
    Leaving aside Cohen’s picture of the heuristic situation in science, if ac-
ceptance were completely divorced from belief in this manner, theory choice
would seem to become wholly a matter of convention. Cohen’s response is
that this is not so, since the ‘‘observational element’’ of scientiﬁc knowledge
does, in fact, require belief (1989, p. 386). But if this observational element is
cited in support of accepting a theory, as Cohen admits it is, then the con-
nection between belief and acceptance is restored, at least at the level of the
empirical substructures again. Given this analysis, what sense are we to make
of the claim that scientists ‘‘accept that p in the light of the evidence that p’’
(Cohen 1989, p. 385)?


                                       Acceptance, Belief, and Commitment 63
    This suggests that the link between belief and acceptance cannot be
completely severed in the way that Cohen wants. But now we face something
of a dilemma: At one extreme, we have the view that identiﬁes acceptance and
belief; at the other, there is the view that regards them as entirely distinct.
Both views have their faults, yet both seem to capture a part of what is
involved in accepting a theory: belief, of some kind, on the one hand and
commitment on the other. Is there an alternative, some sort of ‘‘middle way,’’
which embodies what is right about each of these two extremes?
    We can shed some light on this dilemma by noting that both of these views
suffer from a defect common to many discussions of these issues-namely, that
of identifying ‘‘belief that p’’ with ‘‘belief that p is true,’’ where truth is un-
derstood in the standard correspondence sense. It is not only that, as Cohen
suggests, the conditions for rational belief are commonly regarded as indis-
tinguishable from those of rational acceptance but also that the nature of
belief itself is treated in too coarse-grained a manner. As we have noted,
‘‘belief,’’ as such, is typically analyzed in terms of holding a proposition to be
true in the simple correspondence sense. Indeed, it is often identiﬁed in this
manner. Now this might be appropriate if the objects of knowledge are taken
to be propositions of the form ‘‘The grass is green,’’ but, we suggest, it is
hopelessly inadequate for accommodating those forms of knowledge that have
as their objects theories, ‘‘worldviews,’’ or complex representations in general.
Adopting an anthropological perspective, we might say that whereas philos-
ophers deﬁne beliefs to be propositions accepted as true, scientists themselves
use ‘‘belief’’ with a certain vagueness, a vagueness that reﬂects their epistemic
fallibility (cf. Sperber 1982, pp. 174–175). In chapter 1, we suggested that
this element of ‘‘vagueness’’ can be captured through the formalism of quasi
or pragmatic truth. The central claim of the current chapter is that this
approach can be expanded to accommodate the ‘‘remarkable exercise’’ of
scientiﬁc acceptance.


   Partial Truth and Representational Belief

The further question we must address, then, is what is the connection between
this notion of partial truth and belief? More speciﬁcally, what is the attitude
evinced in the statement that a theory is believed to be partially true only?
These questions can be answered by taking on board a distinction drawn in a
related context-namely, the debates surrounding cognitive relativism.
    According to the cognitive relativist, different communities, whether
broadly cultural or narrowly scientiﬁc, ‘‘live in different worlds’’ (Sapir 1929;
cf. Kuhn 1970). How to understand such a claim is an interesting issue, but
one possible take on it is to say that different communities hold different beliefs
to be true, where such beliefs may be both ‘‘theoretical’’ and ‘‘observational’’
and ‘‘truth’’ here is understood in the correspondence sense, since it is the
correspondence that allows for the equating of different beliefs with different
‘‘worlds.’’ Sperber has identiﬁed the crucial weakness of such claims with a
reliance-by both sides of the rationalist-relativist debate-on an inappropriate


64 Science and Partial Truth
understanding of ‘‘belief’’ (1975, 1982). Thus, he rejects the traditional phil-
osophical description of ‘‘belief’’ as a verb of propositional attitude, where a
sentence is the object of the belief and the verb expresses the mental attitude to
the proposition expressed by this sentential object. This description is funda-
mentally misleading since,

   it obscures the fact that we can have such ‘‘attitudes’’ to objects other than
   propositions in the strict sense. Propositions are either true or false. Sets of
   propositions are either consistent or inconsistent. Propositions, as opposed
   to sentences or utterances, cannot be ambiguous and hence true in some
   interpretations and false in others. Yet some of our so-called beliefs have
   several possible interpretations and we can hold them without committing
   ourselves to any of their interpretations. (1982, pp. 167–168)

In particular, ‘‘anthropologists . . . use ‘belief’ with a vagueness suited to their
data’’ (Sperber 1982, p. 174), whereas ‘‘philosophers discussing relativism
generally take for granted as a matter of mere deﬁnition that the objects of
beliefs are ‘propositions accepted as true’’’ (pp. 174–175).3
    What is required is an account of belief that ﬁts anthropological practice,
and this can be achieved, Sperber maintains, by dropping this deﬁnition.
Hence, the objects of many beliefs and, typically, those of non-Western cul-
tures described as ‘‘irrational’’ should not be viewed as propositions in the
standard sense but rather as ‘‘conceptual representations’’ without fully ﬁxed
propositional content. Just as many of our utterances cannot be expressed as
sentences per se, but rather as semigrammatical strings of words, so many of
our beliefs are ‘‘semipropositional’’ in that ‘‘they approximate but do not
achieve propositionality’’ (Sperber 1982, p. 169).
    Crucially, ‘‘a semi-propositional representation can be given as many
propositional interpretations as there are ways of specifying the conceptual
content of its elements. In principle, one of these interpretations is the proper
one: it identiﬁes the proposition to which the semi-propositional representation
is intended to correspond’’ (p. 169). These semipropositional representations
are ‘‘entertained,’’ in Sperber’s words, because they provide us with the means
for processing information that exceeds our conceptual capacities, and in this
way they can lead us to full comprehension. In particular, they provide a
means of dealing with mutually inconsistent ideas by allowing such ideas to be
represented in semipropositional form (Sperber 1982, p. 170). Furthermore, in
suggesting a range of possible interpretations, they may be enormously fruitful
in a heuristic sense.
    Not all beliefs have semipropositional representations as their object,
however. A further distinction can be made between ‘‘factual’’ and ‘‘repre-
sentational’’ beliefs, where the difference is that for the former ‘‘there is
awareness only of (what to the subject is) a fact, while in the case of a
representational belief, there is awareness of a commitment to a representation’’
(Sperber 1982, p. 171; our emphasis). Holding a factual belief is rational
when it is consistent with and warranted by other beliefs of ‘‘closely related
content.’’ Given the epistemic unavailability of some of the implications of a
semipropositional representation, so that their consistency cannot be easily


                                       Acceptance, Belief, and Commitment 65
established, it is not rational to have a semipropositional representation as the
object of a factual belief. Rather, such representations are the objects of rep-
resentational beliefs, which are vaguer, or ‘‘fuzzier,’’ in the sense of being
conceptually incomplete. Thus, ‘‘A representation R is [the object of] a rep-
resentational belief of a subject if and only if the subject holds some factual
belief about R such as he may sincerely state R’’ (Sperber 1982, p. 172).
    In such cases, the subject may, for example, hold a factual belief to the
effect that the proper interpretation of R is true. Importantly, when R can be
described as propositional, there is no difference, rationally, between holding
that the proper interpretation of R is true and simply holding R. When R is a
semipropositional representation, however, it may be entirely rational to hold
a representational belief in R, in the sense of holding a factual belief that the
proper interpretation of R is true, but irrational to hold a factual belief in
R-that is, to believe that R itself is true (in the correspondence sense).
Whereas the rationality of holding factual beliefs is cashed out in terms of
evidential support directly involving observation, that of holding representa-
tional beliefs of semipropositional content is to be understood in terms of a
warrant that is mediated in certain ways, such as by the beliefs of other
epistemic agents, for example. Thus, it is rational to believe, ‘‘factually,’’ a
proposition such as ‘‘the snow is white,’’ where this is understood as believing
that ‘‘the snow is white’’ is true, in the correspondence sense, given the
evidence of our senses. Likewise, it is rational to believe, ‘‘representationally,’’
that ‘‘quarks are colored,’’ given our epistemic dependence on, and trust in,
the theoretical physicist who asserts such a sentence; this is what Sperber
calls ‘‘evidence on its source’’ (1982, p. 173). In many cases, the warrant for
representational belief in p, where p is taken to have semipropositional con-
tent, is underwritten by those with relevant expertise, whether they be sci-
entists or tribal princes. Nevertheless, the chain of epistemic dependence
terminates in a factual belief of some kind; to describe the nature of the links
in such a chain is, of course, precisely to tackle the problem of the relationship
between theory and evidence. (We shall return to this point shortly.)
    Abandoning the propositional account of belief in favor of something that
admits of doxastic differentiation in the preceding sense then allows one to
accommodate apparently irrational beliefs within a broadly rationalist per-
spective. With belief no longer tied to correspondence truth, the relativist
slogan ‘‘different cultures live in different worlds’’ is gutted of sense. Trans-
ferring this idea from speciﬁcally anthropological practice to scientiﬁc practice
in general, we shall argue that (1) Sperber’s distinctions provide a set of
doxastic clothes for the body of formal results laid out in chapter 1 and (2),
running in the other direction, that his notion of a semipropositional rep-
resentation can be understood in terms of partial structures. We shall develop
the second argument ﬁrst, in order to be able to apply Sperber’s framework to
the issues we are concerned with.
    The problem with Sperber’s position as it stands is that his notion of a
‘‘semipropositional representation’’ is itself rather vague and nebulous. As a
colleague at a seminar put it, ‘‘I know what a proposition is, but I have no
idea what a ‘semi-proposition’ could be!’’ Actually, the metaphysical status of


66 Science and Partial Truth
propositions themselves is unclear, as is well known,4 and it is perhaps an
exaggeration to say that we know what they are, given the lack of consensus
over whether they are, in fact, sentencelike objects, suitably abstract perhaps,
or sets of possible worlds, or collections of actual objects and their properties.
Nevertheless, although our claims to knowledge in this regard might be based
on nothing more than a sense of cozy philosophical familiarity, at least one of
the characteristics of propositions is well understood-namely, that of being
the bearer of truth or falsity (in the correspondence sense). Thus, if proposi-
tions are to be replaced by ‘‘semipropositional representations,’’ some account
must be given of the characteristics of these entities and the kind of formal
framework into which they ﬁt.
    We have seen that these representations are ‘‘conceptually incomplete’’ in
important respects, although they do have ‘‘proper’’ interpretations. In other
words, semipropositional representations are partial, in a fundamental sense,
although they point, as it were, to a complete representation in the limit at
least. If the notion of a representation can be captured in general by a model
or structure, then, we suggest, the appropriate formal expression of Sperber’s
idea is in terms of partial structures in which the conceptual incompleteness is
itself represented by a family of partial relations. The corresponding ‘‘com-
plete’’ representation can then obviously be taken to be the relevant ‘‘total’’
structure in which this family of relations is suitably extended.
    The distinction between ‘‘factual’’ and ‘‘representational’’ belief can then
be understood in terms of that between correspondence and ‘‘pragmatic’’ or
quasi truth. (As we noted in chapter 1, there is some exegetical justiﬁcation for
this shift in terminology.) As Sperber remarks, when holding a factual belief,
there is awareness only of a ‘‘fact’’ and the factual belief that p is to be
understood as a belief that p is true in the correspondence sense. In such cases,
there is no difference between holding that p is true and holding that p. When
holding a representational belief of semipropositional content, however, there
is awareness of a commitment to a representation, and in such cases talk of
correspondence truth is inappropriate, since it is not at all clear to what, if
anything, a semipropositional representation ‘‘corresponds.’’ Here the rep-
resentational belief that p is interpreted as a belief that p is pragmatically or
quasi-true only.
    The double duty performed by partial structures becomes apparent again:
In a report of a representational belief of the form ‘‘belief that p,’’ the sentence
p is to be regarded as partially or pragmatically true while the semiproposi-
tional content of such beliefs is then formally expressed by the relevant partial
structure, which in representing our (partial) knowledge of the domain con-
cerned is the object of the belief. As we noted in chapter 1, this double duty is
also performed by the (total) models in the Tarskian account: In a report of a
factual belief, p is regarded as true in the correspondence sense within some
model that expresses the propositional content of p.5
    Our central claim in this chapter is that scientiﬁc beliefs should be regarded
as representational in precisely this manner (see da Costa and French 1990b;
French 1990; da Costa and French 1993a and b). In particular, although
certain elements of scientiﬁc practice might be regarded as the objects of


                                       Acceptance, Belief, and Commitment 67
factual beliefs, a scientist’s belief in the theoretical model itself, taken to be
quasi-true, is more properly characterized as representational. Both of these
points require further elaboration.


   Factual Beliefs and Data

On the Received View, a conceptual line was drawn between ‘‘theoretical
statements’’ and ‘‘observation statements.’’ One suggestion, then, would be to
tie representational belief to the former and factual belief to the latter. But as
we all know, observation statements are ‘‘theory-laden,’’ and so the ties
cannot be so straightforward; indeed, claims such as this led to the demise of
this view. Nevertheless, these claims require careful scrutiny, and there may
yet be a structural distinction corresponding to Sperber’s doxastic one. Before
we get to that point, however, we need to explore the possibility of locating
such a structural distinction within the model-theoretic approach.
    An obvious candidate for those elements that are the objects of factual
belief are the empirical substructures of a theory. Thus van Fraassen, for
example, has asserted that these empirical substructures are ‘‘candidates for
the direct representation of observable phenomena’’ (1980, p. 64). A theory is
then regarded as empirically adequate if it has some model such that ‘‘all
appearances are isomorphic to empirical substructures of that model’’ (p. 64),
where the ‘‘appearances’’ are themselves structures describable in experi-
mental and measurement reports.6 With the empirical substructures ‘‘directly
representing’’ the observable phenomena via their isomorphic relationship
with the ‘‘appearances,’’ ‘‘factual’’ belief would indeed seem to be the ap-
propriate doxastic attitude toward them.
    However, the situation is rather more complicated.7 Van Fraassen himself
refers to ‘‘the point long emphasised by Patrick Suppes that theory is not
confronted with raw data but with models of the data and that the con-
struction of these data models is a sophisticated and creative process’’ (van
Fraassen 1985a, p. 271). Thus the ‘‘appearances’’ are in fact models of data.
More precisely, according to Suppes, these models are ‘‘empirical algebras’’;
more generally, they are partial algebras or just partially ordered sets with
certain operations deﬁned upon them.8 But now talk of partiality in this
context undermines the effort to view such models, or the corresponding
empirical substructures, as the object of factual beliefs in Sperber’s sense since
we obviously no longer have ‘‘direct representation.’’ On the other hand,
giving up the latter entirely has consequences that would be unpalatable to
many: As we have noted, the primary motivation behind Sperber’s distinction
is to respond to the cognitive relativist, and giving up the distinction would be
tantamount to giving up the game. Likewise, dropping factual belief from our
representation of scientiﬁc practice would have fundamental implications for
issues to do with scientiﬁc objectivity, rationality, and the like, undermining
our efforts to counter those who would give sociological accounts of these
latter notions. Perhaps, then, we should not be so hasty in giving up on
factual belief.


68 Science and Partial Truth
    As van Fraassen has also acknowledged, the relationship between a given
model and some ‘‘phenomenon’’ is a complicated one. One of the most in-
ﬂuential recent accounts of ‘‘phenomena’’ and their distinction from ‘‘data’’
has been given by Bogen and Woodward, and we shall indicate how this
distinction might be pressed into service on the side of ‘‘factual’’ belief (Bogen
and Woodward 1988; cf. Kaiser 1991 and 1995). Their central idea is that
‘‘well-developed scientiﬁc theories . . . predict and explain facts about phe-
nomena. Phenomena are detected through the use of data, but in most cases
are not observable in any interesting sense of that term’’ (p. 306). Data serve
as evidence for the existence of phenomena, and the latter serve as evidence
for, or in support of, theories. The distinction is elaborated in terms of what
constitutes the explananda in science: Theories explain phenomena and not
data. Could such data be the objects of factual belief? To answer this, we need
to look carefully at the characteristics of such data, to examine the theory-
ladenness issue in this context, and to consider how Bogen and Woodward’s
distinction meshes with the model-theoretic points made previously. ‘‘Ex-
amples of data include bubble chamber photographs, patterns of discharge in
electronic particle detectors and records of reaction times and error rates in
various psychological experiments. Examples of phenomena, for which the
above data might provide evidence, include weak neutral currents, the decay
of the proton, and chunking and recency effects in human memory’’ (Bogen
and Woodward 1988, p. 306; see also the example given in Franklin 1995,
p. 453).
    Data can be straightforwardly observed (Bogen and Woodward 1988, p. 305
and p. 314), are idiosyncratic to particular experimental contexts (Bogen and
Woodward 1988, p. 317), are the result of a ‘‘highly complex and unusual
coincidence of circumstances’’ (p. 318),9 and are ‘‘relatively easy to identify,
classify, measure, aggregate, and analyze in ways that are reliable and re-
producible by others’’ (p. 320). Phenomena, on the other hand, are not ob-
servable, are not idiosyncratic, have ‘‘stable, repeatable characteristics which
will be detectable by means of a variety of different procedures’’ involving dif-
ferent kinds of data (p. 317), and in general are constant and stable across
different experimental contexts (p. 326). These characteristics-particularly
those to do with observability and reliability-suggest that data might be can-
didates for the objects of factual belief, whereas phenomena should be associated
with the latter’s representational counterparts. But if both data and phenomena
are theory-laden,10 the distinction between the two collapses; representational
elements creep into the data, and phenomena can be regarded as ‘‘observed.’’
    Following Bogen and Woodward, we can respond to this problem by re-
calling that on the Received View an observation statement was something
like ‘‘the melting point of lead is 327 degrees C’’ (1988, p. 308). Of course,
this appears theory-laden, involving, as it does, the theoretical notion of a
melting point. But what is actually observed in an experiment are various
thermometer readings-‘‘the scatter of individual data points’’ (p. 308)-from
which the melting point of lead is inferred or estimated, subject to experi-
mental error. It is such readings, and ‘‘splodges’’ on a screen, or drawings of
damaged brains, that are the constituents of ‘‘data’’ and these-or rather the


                                      Acceptance, Belief, and Commitment 69
statements reporting them-are certainly not theory-laden in this sense. Of
course, one could stipulate that the process of inferring the melting point of
lead from these readings is theory-laden, but such a claim sheds no light
whatsoever on the process itself or on the structural connections that sub-
sequently come to be established (Bogen and Woodward 1988, p. 310; Suppes
1967, pp. 62–63).
    But, it might be objected, the data are theory-laden in another but equally
pernicious sense. Among their essential characteristics are not just ob-
servability but also reliability, and to assess this some theory that system-
atically explains the data must be invoked. Bogen and Woodward respond to
this objection in great detail (1988, pp. 327–334), and the upshot is that
reliability is typically established not by constructing an explanatory theory
but by empirically ruling out or controlling sources of error and confounding
factors, or by statistical arguments and so on (see also Franklin 1986). Here,
general arguments about whether observation is theory-laden are of no help in
understanding how reliability comes to be established; again, what is required
are detailed case-by-case analyses. Furthermore, it is the theory-independent
determination of reliability that underpins the phenomena’s robustness and
objectivity (cf. Culp 1995). If the reliability of the data were dependent on
highly speciﬁc (and typically causal) theoretical explanations, any shift in the
latter-something that is both common and notable in the history of science-
would pull the rug out from under the former. As Bogen and Woodward note,
this seldom happens, and their account helps clarify a further element of
structural stability and continuity in science (1988, p. 334).
    As for the other side of the coin-the view that phenomena can be ob-
served-Bogen and Woodward contend that on the one hand, if observation is
given a clear interpretation in terms of the ‘‘traditional’’ account of percep-
tion, then the phenomena are not observable in terms of this account,
whereas on the other, attempts to broaden the notion to embrace phenomena
weaken it to the point of fatal vagueness (1988, pp. 343–349). Thus, ac-
cording to the traditional view, a ‘‘distal’’ stimulus outside the human sensory
system causes a ‘‘proximal’’ stimulus within it, which in turn produces a
‘‘sensory event.’’ However, phenomena do not play the role of distal stimuli in
this sense, and although we can tell a theoretical story regarding the causal
contribution such phenomena make to the process that eventually results in a
‘‘sensory event,’’ it is not the case that they actually explain this event:
Claiming that the melting point of lead is the distal stimulus involved in our
temperature measurements, or that the neutrino ﬂux is the distal stimulus
involved in the seeing of splodges on the scintillation screen (p. 345) renders
this notion useless. Neither the melting point of lead nor the neutrino ﬂux is
what the observer is looking at in these experiments. As for attempts to
broaden the concept of observability to cover the ‘‘observation’’ of the neu-
trino ﬂux from the sun, for example, the best known of these is based upon an
information-theoretic view of observation that remains as little more than a
promissory note (Shapere 1982). If phenomena as disparate as the melting
point of lead and the neutrino ﬂux from the sun are regarded as observable,
then the term is rendered vague and uninformative.


70 Science and Partial Truth
    Leaving further discussion of these particular issues aside, our intention is
simply to motivate the distinction between factual and representational belief.
The point we wish to stress here is that the objects of the former are propo-
sitions about data in Bogen and Woodward’s sense, corresponding to van
Fraassen’s ‘‘raw’’ data-that is, the individual temperature readings from
which we estimate the melting point of lead, or the ‘‘splodges’’ on the scin-
tillation screen on the basis of which we infer the properties of neutrinos. It is
here that we have ‘‘direct representation,’’ if anywhere. The question now is
how this-and in particular this notion of ‘‘phenomena’’-ﬁts in with our
model-theoretic account.
    Foreshadowing the future emphasis on the epistemology of experiment by
Bogen and Woodward, Franklin, Galison, Hacking, and others, Suppes earlier
noted,

   The concrete experience that scientists label an experiment cannot be
   connected to a theory in any complete sense. That experience must be put
   through a conceptual grinder that in many cases is excessively coarse. Once
   the experience is passed through the grinder, often in the form of the quite
   fragmentary records of the complete experiment, the experimental data
   emerge in canonical form and constitute a model of the experiment. (1967,
   p. 62)

Thus the ‘‘raw’’ data are fed through this conceptual grinder to generate a
model of the experiment or data model, and from such models the ‘‘phe-
nomena’’ are inferred.11 At this point the issue of what exactly constitutes
‘‘phenomena’’ arises. When it comes to the ontological classiﬁcation of
‘‘phenomena,’’ Bogen and Woodward admit they are inclined to be somewhat
casual: ‘‘Phenomena seem to fall into many different traditional ontological
categories-they include particular objects, objects with features, events,
processes and states’’ (1988, p. 321). Hence ‘‘phenomena’’ seem to span
many levels of abstraction, from the melting point of lead to the ﬂux of
neutrinos; we can begin to get a grasp on the breadth of this range if we
consider the complexity of Suppes’s ‘‘conceptual grinder’’ in each case. At this
point we must tread carefully, given the implications for the realism-empiri-
cism debate as a whole.
   When one talks of ‘‘inferring’’ the phenomena from the data, what one is
actually inferring, of course, are the properties of the relevant objects, pro-
cesses or whatever; indeed, it is through such properties that the latter are
identiﬁed. These properties will then feature in an appropriate model of the
objects, processes, and the like concerned. It is these models of the phenomena
that are supported by the relevant data models, and now the question as to
how this distinction meshes with the model-theoretic account outlined pre-
viously becomes acute, since the aforementioned ontological breadth of the
phenomena would appear to jar with the apparently rather simplistic dis-
cussion of theoretical structures and empirical substructures.
   Thus, models of the phenomena might be identiﬁed with the phenom-
enological models emphasised by Cartwright and her coworkers.12 Two
consequences follow from this identiﬁcation: (1) Models of phenomena are


                                      Acceptance, Belief, and Commitment 71
regarded as ‘‘independent’’ of, or autonomous from, theory, and (2) models of
phenomena are regarded as ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘true to the phenomena,’’ whereas
theoretical models ‘‘lie’’ and are false. Let us consider these points carefully.
    As we noted in the previous chapter, the claim that such models are ‘‘rel-
atively independent’’ of theory is cashed out, at least in part, as independence
in terms of aims, methods, and techniques. Thus the difference between the-
oretical models and models of phenomena is spelled out methodologically
(Woodward 1989; Kaiser 1991, 1995; Cartwright, Shomar, and Suárez 1995;
Suárez 1999a; Morrison 1999).13 Unfortunately, such claims fail to stand up
to detailed scrutiny. The purported ‘‘relative independence’’ from theory dis-
appears once the heuristic situation in all its complexity is taken into account.
Furthermore, the analogies that typically are a central feature of these models
can be represented model-theoretically (French and Ladyman 1997). This,
together with the theoretical nature of models of phenomena, suggests that
they, too, can be captured in terms of partial structures (cf. Bueno 1997).
    But then what of the much vaunted ‘‘robustness’’ of the phenomena,
which helps underpin these claims of theory independence? Again, there is a
certain degree of vagueness here, corresponding to the ambiguity over what
the relevant ‘‘phenomenon’’ is taken to be (Suárez pre-print, p. 5). Certainly,
atoms are ‘‘robust’’ in the sense that they feature in many if not all but the
highest level theories of matter, but the Bohr model could hardly be so de-
scribed. Likewise, Shapere has long emphasized the ‘‘theory transcendent’’
status of terms like ‘‘electron,’’ in the sense that instead of merely having
theories in which such terms occur, we now have theories of the electron
(1977).
    In what sense, however, do we have robustness here? Again, we must pay
attention to what it is about the phenomena, ontologically speaking, that is
‘‘inferred’’ from the data-namely, a certain set of properties. The robustness of
the phenomena consists in the continuity through (high-level) theory change
of this set of properties, and it is this in turn that constitutes ‘‘theory trans-
cendence.’’ Thus in the case of electrons, such properties would include so-
called intrinsic ones such as charge and mass, in terms of which an entity is
identiﬁed as an electron. The model of the phenomena encodes these properties
and the relations between them structurally and is robust insofar as aspects of
this structure are retained as high-level theoretical structure is stripped away
and replaced. But then robustness reduces to nothing more than continuity
through theory change, understood structurally, which we shall discuss in
greater detail in chapter 8.
    We stated that the ‘‘relative independence/autonomy’’ of phenomena from
theory is to be understood ‘‘at least in part’’ methodologically. It is also
characterized epistemically as models of phenomena/phenomenological
models being true or ‘‘true to the phenomena,’’ whereas theoretical models
are not. We have already expressed our disquiet about such a distinction, and
the prior considerations lead us to suggest that models of phenomena should
be regarded as partially true only, just as theoretical models are (Bueno 1997).
If the phenomena are as Bogen and Woodward say they are-objects such as
the electron, or processes such as superconductivity-then being ‘‘true to the


72 Science and Partial Truth
phenomena’’ can only be understood as describing correctly (or at least to
within experimental error) certain properties of these phenomena. Insofar as
these properties become well established and the model achieves a degree of
robustness, it can certainly be described as true in some sense. But it cannot be
regarded as wholly, totally, or completely true in the correspondence sense
since further properties of the phenomenon may be discovered-such as spin
in the case of the electron-and come to be represented within the model. The
model can only be partial in capturing its domain, and thus the appropriate
attitude is to consider it as quasi-true.
    What we have, then, is the following picture of a hierarchy of models (Suppes
1962)-models of data, of instrumentation, of experiment-ordered as to level of
abstraction, taking us from the data model, through models of the phenomena
to the high-level theoretical structures. On this view, the relationship between
theory and evidence is a highly complex one (see, for example, Suppe 1989,
chapter 5). One way of representing it is in terms of the idea of partial iso-
morphism introduced previously (French and Ladyman 1999): Each model in
the hierarchy can be represented in terms of partial structures, and the re-
lationships between these structures then get represented in turn via iso-
morphisms that hold between subfamilies of the relevant families of partial
relations Ri (see Bueno 1997). Again, what we have are interrelated levels of
structure, with no dichotomies, either structural or epistemic, the only sharp
break coming right at the beginning as we move from the ‘‘raw’’ data and
factual belief, through the conceptual grinder to models understood
representationally.14
    Finally, this analysis allows us to respond to the assertion that this dis-
tinction between data and phenomena undercuts constructive empiricism
(Bogen and Woodward, 1988, pp. 351–352; Suárez preprint). We recall that
van Fraassen requires that theories be regarded as empirically adequate only, in
that they ‘‘save the phenomena,’’ understood in turn as observable appear-
ances. But, of course, Bogen and Woodward’s central thesis is that it is the data
that are observable, not the phenomena, and requiring a theory to ‘‘save’’ the
data is unreasonable, since it is phenomena that are the explananda. One way
of dealing with this is to modify constructive empiricism through the in-
troduction of partial structures (Bueno 1997, 1999a). The motivation for ex-
pressing the data models as partial structures has already been given-namely,
that these models are ‘‘empirical algebras’’ that already encode a degree of
partiality. As van Fraassen has already stated his acceptance of Suppes’s point,
it seems a plausible move to further regard the relationship between the models
in the hierarchy in terms of partial isomorphisms; in place of the relatively
straightforward notion of ‘‘embedding,’’ we have that of ‘‘approximate em-
bedding’’ (van Fraassen 1989, p. 366 fn. 5; Bueno 1999a).
    However, if we allow a level of models of phenomena to intercede between
data models and the higher level theoretical structures, then the constructive
empiricist may in fact not be able to maintain her antirealist stance: ‘‘If we
possess evidence and procedures which can justify belief in claims about
phenomena, even though many phenomena are unobservable, it is hard to see
on what grounds van Fraassen could deny that we are justiﬁed in believing as


                                     Acceptance, Belief, and Commitment 73
true many other typical theoretical beliefs regarding entities like atoms,
electrons and neutrinos’’ (Bogen and Woodward 1988, p. 351). Since we are
justiﬁed in believing such claims just in case they are supported by reliable
data, the ontological breadth of phenomena forces the constructive empiricist
to give up her antirealism. However, the fallacy in this argument is clear in the
previous quotation: It is to regard ‘‘belief that p’’ as ‘‘belief that p is true,’’ and
we have already suggested that the appropriate attitude where claims about
phenomena are concerned is to regard them as partially true only.15 Thus the
data justify us in believing as partially or quasi-true claims about phenomena,
and if empirical adequacy is understood in these terms,16 the constructive
empiricist’s antirealist line can be maintained. From this perspective, empirical
adequacy can be interpreted as a form of representational belief.



   Representational Beliefs and Theories

Let us turn now to this notion of representational belief. In a sense, there is
less to establish here; we have already argued for a blurring of the apparent
distinction between theories and models in science on the grounds that both
should properly be regarded as quasi-true only. With regard to models, this is
supported by a consideration of their very nature as representing only in part
their ‘‘object,’’ and as we have stressed, following Hesse, it is because they are
‘‘unfaithful’’ in this sense that they gain such heuristic power. Those ex-
amples of ‘‘structures’’ that are typically deigned to be theories are also in-
complete in ways that allow for further growth and development; theories are
‘‘open’’ as recent accounts of scientiﬁc practice have emphasized.
    In addition, as we indicated at the beginning of this chapter, the history of
science can be turned to in support of the view being defended here: Given this
history, we have no warrant for regarding current theories as true in the
correspondence sense; rather, we should take them to be partially true and,
correspondingly, the beliefs in such theories to be representational in Sper-
ber’s sense. There is a further problem, however, to do with the ‘‘ﬁnal’’ theory:
If there is an ‘‘end to science,’’ an end that may, moreover, be in sight, then
there are no grounds for projecting representational belief into the future
indeﬁnitely. That there is such an end is one of the core tenets of ‘‘convergent
realism,’’ which the appeal to the historical record was designed to attack.
Furthermore, the convergent realist typically appeals to the kind of cumula-
tive view of science based on structural correspondences between theories
that we are going to defend in subsequent chapters. How then can we use the
historical record in this way to defend Sperber’s representational beliefs as the
appropriate doxastic attitude in science? The point is particularly acute, as
quasi truth has been deﬁned relative to a Tarskian conception of a ‘‘ﬁnal’’
truth in the correspondence sense (Bueno and de Souza 1996).
    Now there is clearly a thicket of issues here. One concerns the very idea of an
‘‘end’’ to science. In his inaugural address as Lucasian professor at Cambridge,
Hawking answered yes to the question ‘‘Is the End in Sight for Theoretical


74 Science and Partial Truth
Physics?’’ suggesting that a form of supergravity theory was precisely the end
theory in question (Hawking 1980). However, in his own presidential address
to the British Society for the Philosophy of Science, Redhead took a much more
cautious view, noting that Hawking’s favored theory has already been replaced
by the superstring program (Redhead 1993).
    Although there are aspects of this debate that we do not need to go into in
detail, it is worth noting the following: First of all, the ‘‘end’’ in question is
typically an explanatory ‘‘end,’’ and the question arises as to how we are to
characterize explanation in science (we shall touch on this again in chapter 9).
As Redhead notes, if one moves from the observation that the practice of physics
consists in the elaboration of a range and diversity of models and approxima-
tions, to the claim that a separation can be effected between low-level ‘‘phe-
nomenological’’ models and high-level ‘‘theoretical’’ ones, then one is likely to
reject the notion of an explanatory end theory altogether (1993, p. 330).
Redhead himself is unhappy with such a move, but, as he notes, there is little
support to be gained by appealing to a deductive view of explanation. Rejecting
such a division between the phenomenological and theoretical on either
epistemic or structural grounds as we have, one might still elaborate an al-
ternative account of explanation in terms of partial isomorphisms holding be-
tween models at various levels and thus retain the idea of an end theory of
physics.
    Second, however, as Redhead also points out, such a ﬁnal theory may not
be regarded as a ‘‘theory of everything’’ if one rejects the reductive stance that
alleges that all sciences can ultimately be reduced to theoretical physics (see
Cartwright 1995, 1999; Dupré 1995; Ereshefsky 1995). Although we have
doubts about the basis for such a rejection (Morrison 1995),17 it could con-
ceivably still be claimed that even though representational belief may at some
point no longer be the appropriate attitude in theoretical physics, it may still
be so for biology, say, or psychology. Finally, however, even within physics
Redhead’s own view is that the end is a receding horizon and that ‘‘to achieve
the end of physics is as unrealistic as grasping the pot of gold at the end of a
rainbow’’ (1993, p. 340). Nevertheless, he insists, this claim can be dis-
sociated from the view that science is essentially cumulative, since the latter
does not logically entail the former; progress in science could simply be open-
ended, of course. While acknowledging that there is more to be said on this
subject, we shall continue to maintain that representational belief offers the
most appropriate doxastic framework for science, and also push forward our
broadly cumulative agenda.18
    Returning to Sperber’s distinction, further support for this position can be
drawn from a perhaps unexpected direction, We recall that for Sperber rep-
resentational beliefs are further distinguishable from factual beliefs by their
warrant: The evidence for a representational belief is typically ‘‘evidence on its
source’’ in the sense, as we noted before, that this warrant is mediated by the
beliefs of other epistemic agents. Now, it might be thought that this is ap-
propriate for the beliefs of nonscientiﬁc laypeople, or those of scientists from
one ﬁeld considering the theories of another about which they have little or no
professional expertise, but surely not for those of scientists working directly


                                      Acceptance, Belief, and Commitment 75
within a domain. However, it is precisely this sense of ‘‘directness’’ that is
problematic.
    The traditional theory of knowledge focuses on the lone thinker-one only
has to recall Descartes’s image of himself in the Meditations-and, it has been
claimed, is ‘‘falsely individualistic’’ in ignoring our epistemic dependency on
others (Hardwig 1985, 1991). There are two observations of epistemic
practice that can be given in support of such a claim. The ﬁrst concerns our
lack of doxastic omniscience: ‘‘If I would be rational, I can never avoid some
epistemic dependence on experts, owing to the fact that I believe more than I
can become fully informed about’’ (Hardwig 1985, p. 340). We shall return to
this particular fact of our doxastic circumstances in chapter 7.
    Second, and signiﬁcant for our present discussion, there is the element of
teamwork and the role of the relevant epistemic community: ‘‘Much of what
people count as knowledge, in modern societies, does rest on structures of
epistemic dependence. Scientists, researchers, and scholars are, sometimes at
least, knowers, and all of these knowers stand on each other’s shoulders. You
know only because others have direct evidence’’ (Hardwig 1985, p. 340).
‘‘Exhibit A’’ presented by Hardwig is a paper on experimental high-energy
physics that has no fewer than ninety-nine authors. This huge team of ex-
perimentalists, already distinct from theoreticians, can itself be broken down
into subgroups, with the lines of epistemic dependence running both within
and between these smaller teams. Such developments are well known, of
course, but the signiﬁcant point for us is that ‘‘the layperson-expert re-
lationship is also present within the structure of knowledge, and the expert is
an expert partially because the expert so often takes the role of the layperson
within the expert’s own ﬁeld’’ (1985, p. 342; Hardwig’s emphasis).19
    ‘‘Evidence on its source’’ is thus not limited to the beliefs of so-called
primitive societies. It is ubiquitous in modern science as well. Perhaps, how-
ever, it might be argued that this epistemic dependence is limited to post–
World War II high-energy experimental physics, where the complexity and
cost of the experiments involved necessitates such teamwork. However, we
would claim that both throughout the history of science and within the more
theoretical domains, the idea of the lone researcher boldly going where no
scientist has gone before is a myth. It is not just that, as Newton put it and as
Hardwig echoes, scientists stand on the shoulders of others in the cumulative
sense but that synchronically there is a complex network of relationships,
both theoretical and experimental, in which scientists are enmeshed and on
which they are dependent.
    This picture slots in nicely with Suppes’s view of the hierarchy between
data models and theoretical ones, which replaces the more simplistic accounts
of the relationship between theory and evidence. The latter tend to encourage
the individualistic view by ignoring the complex network of interrelationships
between the more theoretical and more phenomenological levels at each of
which epistemic agents intervene. Similarly, a consideration of the structural
relationships between theories and the way such relationships come to be
established heuristically both allows for such epistemic dependence and
suggests how it comes to be established.


76 Science and Partial Truth
    Thus we have open-ended structures in science constructed and developed
on the basis of ‘‘evidence on the source.’’ Rationality is preserved, ultimately,
because ‘‘others,’’ at least, have direct evidence, although as we noted before
in our discussion of factual belief, here, too, ‘‘directness’’ is problematic. The
point we wish to emphasize is that it is this combination, of representational
belief in a semipropositional representation taken as partially true only, that
fully captures the vagueness, uncertainty, and fallibility of a scientist’s dox-
astic attitudes.


   Semipropositional Knowledge

This discussion suggests an interesting theory of belief and knowledge in
general. In particular, it can embrace recent accounts emphasizing the
‘‘nonlinguistic’’ elements of scientiﬁc knowledge, as we shall now see.
   We recall from chapter 2 that there are alternative theories of belief that
analyze it in terms of representations; the central idea is that for at least some
beliefs, the object of the belief is not a proposition but a representation of some
kind. Here we have suggested that this is so for ‘‘representational beliefs,’’ in
contrast with ‘‘factual’’ ones, and that, furthermore, the representations
themselves can be appropriately viewed as partial structures. Of course, the
characterization of the objects of belief as structured in this manner is not
particularly original.20 Barwise and Perry’s ‘‘situations,’’ for example, are
essentially ﬁne-grained complexes of individuals and properties, which are
represented set-theoretically (Barwise and Perry 1983). Notably, they avoid
the terms ‘‘proposition’’ and ‘‘propositional attitude’’ altogether, declaring,
‘‘We think that propositions are an artifact of the semantic endeavor and not
the sorts of things that people usually talk about, even when reporting
someone’s attitudes’’ (p. 178). However, the sorts of things that people usually
talk about are not just situations, about which one might have ‘‘factual’’
beliefs, but also theories, models, or representations in general, for which such
beliefs would be inappropriate. To reduce representational beliefs to situations
would be to either beg the question against the antirealist or become involved
in talk of possible situations or ‘‘ways the world could be.’’ It is signiﬁcant, we
think, that Barwise and Perry stress the ‘‘external signiﬁcance’’ of language
and meaning in general, where this ‘‘external signiﬁcance’’ is cashed out
throughout their work in terms of examples that we might classify as ‘‘fac-
tual.’’ The point is that much of our talk and many of our beliefs are not
straightforwardly about situations ‘‘out there’’ in the world but about re-
presentations that are connected to ‘‘the world’’ in a much more complicated
and indirect manner.
   Nevertheless, it is interesting to note that ‘‘situation-types’’ are partial, in
that ‘‘they don’t say everything there is to say about everyone, or even ev-
erything about the individuals appearing in the situation-type’’ (Barwise and
Perry 1983, p. 9; cf. the partial nature of data models)-a feature of the theory
which, it is claimed, confers signiﬁcant advantages over standard accounts of
meaning. Perry, for example, touts this aspect as encouraging the reduction of


                                      Acceptance, Belief, and Commitment 77
possible world semantics to a special case of situation theory: Instead of re-
garding propositions as functions from possible worlds-understood as com-
plete or ‘‘total’’-to truth values, they should be regarded as partial functions
in that in some cases they will remain undeﬁned (Perry 1986).21 (Here we are
back to talking about propositions again, but as Schiffer has observed, the
possible worlds theorist can construe a structure as representing the function it
determines (1986, p. 87).) Langholm, whom we cited in chapter 1, has been
guided by these ideas toward a notion of ‘‘partial model’’ that is very similar to
that of a partial structure (Langholm 1988). In particular, partiality arises
either because a particular situation does not contain the ‘‘right’’ facts to
make a sentence true or false, or because there is not a sufﬁcient body of
data to decide whether the sentence is true or false. In the one case, partial
models represent parts of the world, whereas in the other they represent
partial information about the world (Langholm 1988, p. 3). Given the in-
direct nature of representation in science, we would be inclined toward
the second interpretation, and in Langholm’s work we may see the beginnings
of an approximation between situation theory and the partial structures
approach.
    However, our concern here is simply to point out that regarding the objects
of belief in terms of some sort of structured representation is by no means an
outlandish proposal. Certainly, philosophers of science should not feel they
have to be tied to the ‘‘standard’’ philosophical account of propositions,
particularly since, as we have noted, there doesn’t seem to be any such
‘‘standard’’ account!
    The deﬁciencies of broadly ‘‘propositional’’ accounts of scientiﬁc knowledge
has been increasingly emphasized in both the sociology and philosophy of
science as well (see, for example, Giere 1995). Thus Cartwright and her
coworkers have claimed that our scientiﬁc understanding is ‘‘encoded’’ as
much in the models and instruments used by scientists as in the theories they
develop, and they suggest that ‘‘these bits of understanding so encoded should
not be viewed as claims about the nature and structure of reality which ought
to have a proper propositional expression that is a candidate for truth and
falsehood’’ (Cartwright, Shomar, and Suárez 1995, p. 138).
    A similar claim is developed in rather more detail by Baird, whose water-
wheel example we noted in chapter 3 (Baird 1995). Baird contrasts his ‘‘in-
strumental epistemology’’ with the standard expression of scientiﬁc knowledge
in what he calls the ‘‘literary mode’’ and argues that instruments, as the
material products of scientiﬁc practice, are capable of both containing and
conveying knowledge. They do this in a number of ways. The ﬁrst, and ar-
guably most important, he says (Baird 1995, p. 446), involves analogies, as in
those that hold between orreries and the motions of the planets and between
the telegraph and perception (p. 445). Second, ‘‘instruments can carry
meaning representatively’’ (p. 446), and here Baird gives the example of
Smeaton’s material model of the waterwheel. Third, and ﬁnally, an instrument
can carry meaning ‘‘simply in demonstrating a material reality’’ (p. 447).
What is meant by this is that an instrument, such as Faraday’s electric motor,
can both reduce the physical possibilities and, crucially, point to a set of other


78 Science and Partial Truth
possibilities as possible extensions or reﬁnements; there is a nonpropositional
kind of implication at work here (p. 448).
    Scientiﬁc instruments are, of course, material objects, just like Achinstein’s
‘‘representational’’ models or Griesemer’s ‘‘remnant’’ exemplars. For a scien-
tist, there is no question of presenting them as anything but what they are; for
the philosopher of science, however, there is the issue of representing them for
the purposes of discussion and analysis. Baird does this linguistically, or
sententially, in terms of the written word. However, given the ways in which
such instruments can carry meaning, their function as carriers of meaning
can be represented structurally. And to capture the manner in which this
meaning can be extended or reﬁned-that is, to capture the functional
‘‘openness’’ of these instruments-it is appropriate to use partial structures.
Given this openness, this partiality, when we hold beliefs about these instru-
ments, the objects of such belief should be taken to be semipropositional
representations. In this manner, we can understand how this kind of
knowledge goes beyond the propositional and can be regarded as repre-
sentational, without abandoning the very possibility of some kind of formal
framework.22


   Representational Belief and ‘‘Partial’’ Acceptance

Let us now return to the distinction between belief and acceptance. We recall
that factual and representational beliefs differ in that with regard to the for-
mer there is awareness only of a ‘‘fact,’’ whereas in the case of the latter there
is an awareness of a commitment to a representation (Sperber 1982, p. 171).
Factual beliefs simply ‘‘come over’’ one, whereas their representational cou-
sins involve a conscious and voluntary act of ‘‘throwing in one’s lot,’’ as it
were, with the representation concerned. It is precisely this attitude of com-
mitment that, following Cohen, we wish to focus on here as the hallmark of
acceptance. To accept a theory is to be committed, not to believing it to be
true, but to holding it as if it were true, for the purposes of further elaboration,
development, and investigation (as we have already noted, this is a common
position to hold). Thus, Stalnaker writes, ‘‘To accept a proposition is to act, in
certain respects, as if one believed it’’ (1987, p. 80), where ‘‘belief’’ is un-
derstood as belief in the truth of the proposition. However, regarding a theory
as if it were true, within the limited domain of knowledge it models, is pre-
cisely what is captured by the notion of quasi truth.23 Thus, the statement
that ‘‘scientist x accepts theory T’’ can be unpacked as ‘‘scientist x holds a
representational belief in T as partially true only and, therefore, is committed
to ‘going along’ with T for her epistemic purposes.’’
    This view of acceptance clearly distinguishes it from factual belief, which
can be described in terms of a disposition to hold a certain proposition as true,
irrespective of whether it is used as a premise for other purposes. (In this
respect, Cohen’s analysis is correct.) Factual beliefs, being ﬁrmly and tightly
linked to the data, are ‘‘sensitive’’ beliefs in the Humean sense, forced upon
one by the evidential circumstances at hand. Attempts to block or dull the


                                       Acceptance, Belief, and Commitment 79
impact of the evidence in such cases very quickly lead one down the road to
self-delusion (da Costa and French, 1990b). Representational beliefs, how-
ever, are very different in that, as we have said, there is an awareness, not just
of a set of ‘‘facts’’ but also of the semipropositional representation used to
model those ‘‘facts.’’ For any such set, or data model, there will generally be
many such representations, and the decision to accept one, based on its quasi
or pragmatic truth, involves a commitment to that representation or model.
Acceptance is not, therefore, to be divorced from belief in this sense. (It is in
this respect that Cohen’s account is faulty.)
    This emphasis on commitment as an epistemic component of acceptance
has been challenged by Maher, who claims that ‘‘our ordinary notion of
acceptance allows that a scientist can accept a theory, without being com-
mitted to pursuing any particular research program’’ (Maher 1990, p. 386).
In support of such a claim, we are asked to imagine a scientist, Poisson0 , who,
while believing in the corpuscular theory of light, works on the wave theory
for various reasons, including the possibility that this theory may be true or
that it might be a very nice theory if it were true. Now, Poisson0 does no work
on the corpuscular theory, indicating a lack of commitment to it, yet, says
Maher, ‘‘We would still say that Poisson0 accepted the corpuscular theory,
provided his assertion of this theory appeared sincere’’ (1990, p. 386).
    But what is meant by ‘‘sincerity’’ in this argument? In a footnote to his
paper, Maher bluntly states, ‘‘I will not attempt to deﬁne sincerity here. I think
everyone knows what counts as evidence for and against the sincerity of an
assertion, and this shows that everyone understands the notion well enough
for present purposes’’ (1986, p. 391). Given the reasons stated for working on
the wave theory, one might wonder if Poisson0 is truly sincere in his espousal
of the corpuscular view. If someone is working on an alternative theory be-
cause she thinks that there is some degree of probability that it is true, then
this surely suggests that she has doubts about the theory she professes to
believe in and that this belief is, at best, only partial. This is particularly so if
the theories are ontologically at odds with one another, as in this case.
    However, the conclusion of the argument follows only if Poisson0 has never
worked on the corpuscular theory, so that there is demonstrably no com-
mitment to it on this account. But in that case he is in the epistemic cir-
cumstances discussed by Hardwig; that is, Poisson0 is epistemically dependent
on those who have gone along with the corpuscular theory for their epistemic
purposes and who are thus committed to the theory in a ﬁrst-order sense.
Given this dependence, the ‘‘acceptance’’ of the corpuscular theory is best
described as second- (or third- or nth-)hand or ‘‘parasitical.’’ And of course
there may not be the same degree of commitment as there is in the case of
someone actively involved in a given research program. Nevertheless, there
must some such degree since if we accept, in second-hand fashion, something
on the word of an expert, we will, if pressed, reveal this acceptance through
our actions and assertions.24
    Thus ‘‘parasitic’’ acceptance also involves a voluntary act, in that one
chooses whether or not to base one’s future actions on the opinions of the
experts. The epistemic situation is really no different for the scientist working


80 Science and Partial Truth
on her analysis of the results from a particle accelerator, who must decide
whether to accept the claim of the head of the team that designed the com-
puter software that the anomaly she has discovered is not due to some soft-
ware error. And Poisson0 is in precisely the same boat.



   Acceptance and the General Correspondence
   Principle

Shifting our attention away from the element of commitment and back to the
representational aspect, this conception can then accommodate two inter-
esting scenarios: acceptance of theories that have been (strictly) refuted and
acceptance of theories that are (formally) inconsistent.
    The empirical inadequacy of a given model may be revealed through either
an extension of the model’s domain to cover new phenomena or further ex-
ploration of the domain the model was intended to cover. Nevertheless, within
the limited domain in which the model remains empirically adequate, it may
continue to be regarded as pragmatically true and, thus, accepted, within that
limited domain. An obvious example of this is classical mechanics, known to be
‘‘strictly false’’ yet still employed, and for good reason, in the construction of
bridges, buildings, etc. and as the theory of scientiﬁc instrumentation in many
situations. This theory can therefore be regarded as pragmatically true within
a certain delimited domain, and within this domain the theory may be ac-
cepted as if it were true for the purposes indicated previously.
    Indeed, it was precisely a concern to capture the attitudes adopted toward
such theories that provided one of the principal motivations for the develop-
ment of the formalization of pragmatic truth in the ﬁrst place (Mikenberg, da
Costa, and Chuaqui, 1986). Clearly, what we have here is a situation in
which acceptance is appropriate but belief (in the truth of the theory) would
be quite out of place. Thus Cohen writes,
   we should be wrong to believe the theory, in the sense of feeling it to be true.
   But we can certainly accept it, in the sense of going along with it as a
   premiss, for all the purposes to which it is applicable. Similarly, even when
   we regard a physical or chemical law as a simpliﬁcation or idealization we
   can use it as a premiss for calculations about the actual world, if we make
   relevant allowances and corrections. So in this sense we can accept the law
   even when we do not believe it to be true of the actual world. (1989,
   p. 386)
In other words, Newtonian mechanics may be regarded as accepted in the
sense that it is believed to be pragmatically or partially true only, and this, in
turn, is to be understood as meaning that it is not refuted within the domain it
models and from which it draws its empirical support. To be more explicit, it is
accepted for certain purposes and subject to certain provisions regarding the
limits of its applicability. Although a more comprehensive theory is available,
it would clearly be unreasonable to expect engineers and scientists to use this
within the domain of applicability of Newtonian theory. There is, in these


                                       Acceptance, Belief, and Commitment 81
cases, some form of economy-accuracy trade-off (cf. Cherniak 1984), and the
reasoning of scientists in these matters is not different in kind from that of
laypersons in making decisions in general (see, for example, Giere 1988; da
Costa and French 1993b). The point is a perfectly general one and applies, not
just to strictly refuted theories such as classical mechanics, but also to ap-
proximations and idealizations in general (see French and Ladyman 1998;
Laymon 1988).
    In similar vein, de Oliveira argues that Newtonian mechanics contains an
‘‘element of truth,’’ where this notion is explicated in terms of the ‘‘established
sub-theory of a theory’’ (1985, pp. 133–134). However, he claims that to
accept a theory ‘‘means to believe that it has not been refuted and that all
predictions are true which can be deduced from its established sub-theory’’
(1985, p.134) and that Newtonian mechanics is ‘‘no longer accepted’’ (p. 131)
since it has been refuted. There are, of course, well-known dangers in tying
acceptance to refutability in this manner. Furthermore, the scope of accep-
tance in this sense is clearly narrower than that which we envisage here. In
particular, it rules out the possibility of theories being accepted in a provisional
or pragmatic sense, which is precisely the possibility we ﬁnd interesting.
    Nevertheless, de Oliveira does seem to be on the right track in pushing his
‘‘thesis of the unrefutedness of established sub-theories of accepted theories,’’
which asserts that ‘‘no established sub-theory of an accepted theory has ever
been refuted’’ (1985, p. 134). In developing this claim, de Oliveira draws on
Post’s discussion of the General Correspondence Principle (Post 1971). Pre-
sented as the most important of the heuristic constraints on the construction
of theories, the idea behind this principle is that ‘‘no theory that ever ‘worked’
adequately turned out to be a blind alley. Once a theory has proved itself
useful in some respects . . . it will never be scrapped entirely’’ (Post 1971,
p. 237). More precisely, it states that ‘‘any acceptable new theory L should
account for the success of its predecessor S by ‘degenerating’ into that theory
under those conditions under which S has been well conﬁrmed by tests’’
(1971, p. 228).
    Thus the principle makes the strong claim that a new theory must reduce
to its predecessor in the domain successfully modeled by the latter. It implies,
of course, that there are no ‘‘Kuhn losses’’ in science, and it is important to
realize that Post’s work, with its wealth of historical examples, constitutes a
concerted attack on the Kuhnian viewpoint. Even during a scientiﬁc revolu-
tion, the whole of the lower level structure of the theory being overthrown is
not destroyed, although the top levels may be lopped off and the lower levels
may be given a different interpretation (Post 1971). Bluntly put, we never lose
the best of what we have, and this can be mirrored within our account by
what might be called the Principle of the Absolute Nature of Pragmatic Truth:
Once a theory has been shown to be pragmatically true in a certain domain, it
remains pragmatically true, within that domain, for all time. It is this, of
course, which lies behind the justiﬁcation for continuing to use Newtonian
mechanics within certain limits.
    But what of other theories, such as phlogiston theory, which are now
abandoned and have no such pragmatic value? The difference in this case can


82 Science and Partial Truth
perhaps be most clearly identiﬁed by noting the narrower domain in which
phlogiston theory can be regarded as pragmatically true as compared with
Newtonian theory: ‘‘the phlogiston theory ‘worked’ in that it assigned con-
sistent levels of phlogistication (explaining many features) to chemical sub-
stances related in more than one way by reactions. On the other hand it tried to
establish a connection between colour and phlogistication, and this part of the
theory was not successful even at the time’’ (Post 1971, p. 228; Koertge 1968).
    Heuristically, the Correspondence Principle may be used to eliminate cer-
tain candidates as serious possibilities for the successor theory (Post 1971,
p. 235). As Post explains, this use of the principle is generally post hoc in
nature, in the sense that it is employed to eliminate those candidates for the
successor theory that fail to explain the well-conﬁrmed part of the pre-
decessor. Of course, the true extent of the latter is only conjecture at the time
these developments are taking place (Post 1971, p. 231), and considerable
skill may be required in identifying those aspects of the predecessor theory to
be retained by the successor.
    Rueger has given an account of this process in the early development of
Quantum Field Theory (Rueger 1990). He claims that the central question at
the time was ‘‘Which traits of a quantum theoretical formalism, valid at low
and moderately high energies, would remain unchanged if the high energy
behavior of the formalism were, more or less radically, to be modiﬁed? Hei-
senberg tried to separate physical concepts which could not be applied in the
future theory from those concepts which (probably) remained unaffected by
the high energy difﬁculties’’ (p. 209). Any theory that failed to incorporate
these latter concepts would be regarded as an unﬁt candidate for a successor.
An earlier example is represented by Einstein’s 1916 derivation of Planck’s
radiation law, where ‘‘there was reason to believe that the parts of classical
theory used by Einstein would be retained in any more comprehensive theory
that would ultimately resolve the conﬂict between classical electrodynamics
and the quantum postulates’’ (Smith 1988b, p. 437).
    A similar attempt to make the results independent of the details of any
future theory can be seen in Bohr’s use of his correspondence principle, which
allowed him to obtain empirical results from a theory that was, strictly
speaking, inconsistent (Rueger 1990; Smith 1988b). In this case, the problem
of delineating the well-conﬁrmed parts of the theory was particularly acute,
and Bohr used the principle both as a ‘‘defense mechanism,’’ which allowed
for the temporary accommodation of the inconsistent foundations, and as a
heuristic guide, which effectively helped to generate empirical support for the
theory (Lakatos 1970, p. 144).
    It was this support, we claim, that justiﬁed the belief that Bohr’s theory,
although inconsistent (Lakatos 1970, p. 140), was at least partially true and
that also justiﬁed accepting the theory as such. Thus, even inconsistent the-
ories may be accepted, in our sense. The crucial element that does the work
for us is this understanding of acceptance in terms of a representational belief
in a semipropositional representation understood, epistemically, as quasi-true
only.25 As we shall see, this blurs the distinction between heuristics and
justiﬁcation, but it is to the issue of inconsistency in science that we now turn.


                                      Acceptance, Belief, and Commitment 83
         5
         INCONSISTENCY IN SCIENCE

         What we need is a model in which you have theoretical
         structures that may have erroneous assumptions, in which
         some of your data are false, that you may operate on with
         rules that can induce falsehoods, that may have contra-
         dictions and so on, because those are the kinds of problems
         we really face.
                        -W. C. Wimsatt, quoted in Callebaut 1993



   The Control of Anarchy

In their classic text The Logic of Inconsistency, Rescher and Brandom note that
for Peirce the world of ‘‘signs,’’ which is the world we inhabit, is an incon-
sistent and incomplete world (1980, pp. 124–125). Even beyond the conﬁnes
of pragmatism, the prevalence of inconsistency or of ‘‘incongruent’’ suppo-
sitions1 in both our scientiﬁc and ‘‘everyday’’ belief structures is something
that is being increasingly recognized.2 In the world of scientiﬁc representa-
tions, Bohr’s theory, of course, is one of the better known examples, described
by Lakatos as ‘‘sat like a baroque tower upon the Gothic base of classical
electrodynamics’’ (Lakatos 1970, p. 142; see also Brown 1993); others that
have been put forward include the old quantum theory of blackbody radiation
(Norton, 1987), the Everett-Wheeler interpretation of quantum mechanics
(Rescher and Brandom 1980),3 Newtonian cosmology (Norton 1993), the
(early) theory of inﬁnitesimals in calculus and the Dirac d-function (Priest and
Routley 1984, p. 14), Stokes’s analysis of pendulum motion (Laymon 1985),
and Michelson’s ‘‘single-ray’’ analysis of the Michelson-Morley interferometer
arrangement (Laymon 1988). The problem, of course, is how to accom-
modate this aspect of scientiﬁc practice, given that within the framework of
classical logic an inconsistent set of premises yields any well-formed statement


                                      84
as a consequence. The result is disastrous: The set of consequences of an
inconsistent theory will explode into triviality, and the theory is rendered
useless. Another way of expressing this descent into logical anarchy that will
be useful for our discussion is to say that under classical logic the closure of
any inconsistent set of sentences includes every sentence. It is this which lies
behind Popper’s famous declaration that the acceptance of inconsistency
‘‘would mean the complete breakdown of science’’ since an inconsistent
system is ultimately uninformative (Popper 1940, p. 408; 1972, pp. 91–92).4
    Various approaches for accommodating inconsistent theories in science
can be broadly delineated. Thus one can distinguish ‘‘logic-driven control’’ of
this apparent logical anarchy from ‘‘content-driven control,’’ where the for-
mer involves the adoption of some underlying nonclassical logic and the latter
focuses on the speciﬁc content of the theory in question (Norton 1993).
Cutting across this is the syntactic/model-theoretic distinction with which we
have been concerned here. Both the ‘‘logic-driven’’ and ‘‘content-driven’’
approaches are typically developed within the framework of the syntactic
view, and a model-theoretic approach to inconsistency has been compara-
tively little explored, although Laymon has taken some interesting steps in
this direction (1988).5 Finally, there is a further distinction at the epistemic
level, between those who claim that inconsistent theories can be ‘‘accepted’’
in the same sense as can be said of any theory, and those-typically followers
of the content-driven approach-who urge a shift to some weaker attitude of
‘‘entertainment.’’
    The view we shall advocate here can be situated within this nexus of cross-
cutting distinctions: Not surprisingly, we offer a model-theoretic account in
which regarding theories in terms of partial structures offers a straightforward
and natural way of accommodating inconsistency. In particular, it allows us
to bring to the fore the heuristic importance of inconsistency in science.
Shifting to the epistemic perspective, inconsistent theories can then be re-
garded as quasi-true and accepted as such, just like any other theory in
science. As we shall indicate, this common epistemic framework forces a
blurring of the standard discovery-justiﬁcation distinction. (There’s another
distinction to add to our list!) The ﬁnal component of our view is the in-
troduction of a form of paraconsistent logic, not at the structural level of the
theory itself but at the epistemic level as a logic of quasi truth. Given the
overall thrust of this book, we shall restrict our attention to the nontechnical
components of our view, but if the reader is particularly keen, the more formal
details can be found elsewhere (da Costa, French, and Bueno 1998a).


   Inconsistency, Paraconsistency, and Truth

The existence of inconsistency poses obvious problems for any view that
construes theories as sets of sentences expressed in terms of classical logic,
precisely because of the explosion into triviality mentioned previously (cf.
Rescher and Brandom 1980, pp. 21–23). The ‘‘logic-driven’’ approach typi-
cally retains this syntactic view of theories but abandons the underlying


                                                  Inconsistency in Science   85
classical logic for some nonclassical counterpart. The obvious candidate for
such an underlying framework would be one of the (inﬁnitely) many systems
of paraconsistent logic (Arruda 1980; da Costa and Marconi 1987). Brieﬂy
put, a logic is said to be paraconsistent if it can be employed as the underlying
logic of inconsistent but nontrivial theories; a theory is said to be para-
consistent if its underlying logic is a paraconsistent logic (Arruda 1980, p. 2).
Thus, for a paraconsistent logic, the two notions of triviality and inconsistency
are no longer coextensive. In such a logic, the scope of the principle of con-
tradiction, or certain related principles, are restricted in some way or other, so
that from ‘‘p’’ and ‘‘p’’ it is not in general possible to deduce every formula.6
(The meaning of the term paraconsistent logic can then be extended as follows:
A paraconsistent system of logic constitutes a system that can be used to
systematize theories that may themselves contain theorems that, when con-
joined to classical logic, trivialize the latter.)
   The history of such systems is extremely interesting, going back, perhaps,
as far as Aristotle himself, who, despite rejecting contradictions in both the
ontological and practical spheres, appears to have suggested that the principle
of noncontradiction is not the ‘‘highest law’’ (Lukasiewicz 1971).7 However,
the real forerunners of paraconsistent logic in modern times are Lukasiewicz
and, independently, Vasil’év, who suggested that dropping the principle of
contradiction would lead to ‘‘non-Aristotelian’’ logics, by analogy with non-
Euclidean geometries (Arruda 1989). Prompted by Lukasiewicz, Jaśkowski
constructed the ﬁrst system of paraconsistent propositional logic with the
explicit aim, among others, of accommodating inconsistency in science:

   It is known that the evolution of empirical disciplines is marked by periods
   in which the theorists are unable to explain the results of experiments by a
   homogeneous and consistent theory, but use different hypotheses, which
   are not always consistent with one another, to explain the various groups of
   phenomena. This applies, for instance, to physics in its present-day stage . . .
   we have to take into account the fact that in some cases we have to do with
   a system of hypotheses which, if subjected to a too precise analysis, would
   show a contradiction among them or with a certain accepted law, but
   which we use in a way that is restricted so as not to yield a self-evident
   falsehood. (Jaśkowski 1948; cited in Arruda 1980, p. 10)

Jaśkowski called his system ‘‘discussive’’ (or discursive) logic, and it has
subsequently been proposed as a logic of acceptance in science by da Costa (da
Costa and Doria 1995); we shall return to this proposal later.
    Independently of Jaśkowski, one of us (da Costa) began his own work on
paraconsistent systems in the late 1950s, developing them not only at the
propositional level but also at the predicate level, with and without equality, as
well as presenting corresponding calculi of descriptions and paraconsistent set
theories (da Costa 1958, 1974a and b). Da Costa’s best known paraconsistent
logics are based on the propositional calculi ‘‘Cn,’’ which were constructed to
satisfy the following conditions (da Costa and Marconi 1987, p. 6):
   1. The principle of contradiction, in the form (p & p), should not be
      valid in general.


86 Science and Partial Truth
   2. From two contradictory premises, p and p, we should not be able to
      deduce any formula whatever.
   3. They should contain the most important schemes and rules of
      classical logic compatible with the ﬁrst two conditions.
On the basis of this third condition, Priest and Routley classify da Costa’s
systems as belonging to the ‘‘positive-plus’’ approach, in which the full
classical ‘‘positive’’ logic is retained, at the cost of abandoning part of the
theory of negation (Priest and Routley 1984); relevant and nonadjunctive
approaches, on the other hand, renounce part of classical positive logic (the
latter systems in particular will feature prominently in our discussion later).
On the other hand, paraconsistent logics can be regarded either as com-
plementary to classical logic, to be employed when we need a negation weaker
than the classical form, or as a kind of heterodox logic, incompatible with the
classical system and put forward in order to ultimately replace the latter.
    A representative example of the latter approach is Priest, who talks of
blowing the whole classical conﬁguration asunder and argues for the adoption
of the essentially Hegelian position that there are true contradictions (1987;
cf. Arruda 1980, p. 4). The classical generation of all possible propositions
from an inconsistent theory is then blocked through the adoption of a form of
paraconsistent logic in which certain contradictions are tolerated. (For a
discussion of the differences between da Costa’s and Priest’s approaches to
such logics, see da Costa and French 1989c.) More important for our purposes,
Priest includes among the pragmatic grounds for adopting his position the
occurrence of inconsistency in the history of science, explicitly citing Bohr’s
theory with its inconsistent mixture of classical and quantum principles to
support his contention that ‘‘whatever kind of argument it takes to make
something rationally acceptable, an inconsistency can have it’’ (Priest 1987,
p. 127). Thus, the ‘‘logic of science,’’ for Priest, is paraconsistent. However, for
scientiﬁc theories to fulﬁll this supporting role, they must be regarded as true
simpliciter, which is precisely what we reject here. In particular, it is curious
that Priest chooses Bohr’s theory as one of his examples since, leaving aside
the historical fact of its subsequent supersession and the current tendency to
refer to it as a ‘‘model’’ precisely because of its inadequacies, at the time it was
proposed there was considerable controversy over how seriously to take it (for
the spectrum of reactions, see Pais 1991, pp. 152–155);8 Bohr himself is
recorded as saying, ‘‘No, you can’t believe that. This is a rough approach. It
has too much of approximation in it and it is philosophically not right’’ (cited
in Pais 1991, p. 155).9 Assertions of truth in this case seem particularly
inapt.
    Brown has also recently espoused the use of a form of paraconsistent logic
in this context, while rejecting the position that inconsistent theories as a
whole should be regarded as true in the correspondence sense (Brown 1990;
the qualiﬁcation in italics will turn out to be critical). At the heart of this view
is a ‘‘contextual’’ characterization of acceptance, in the sense that a theory is
regarded as accepted when ‘‘we choose to treat [it] as if true, observing
contextual limits on that commitment so as to avoid bringing incompatible
claims into play at any point’’ (Brown 1990, p. 285). The idea here is that the


                                                    Inconsistency in Science     87
context of application of an inconsistent theory may be broken down into
subcontexts in which the conﬂicting principles behind the inconsistency may
be isolated. In this way, the conjunctive application of contradictory claims is
effectively blocked (Brown 1990, p. 284). Since there is no context in which
all the principles are collectively true, in the sense that the evidence sup-
porting scientiﬁc theories is essentially local in nature, the logic of acceptance
here is a paraconsistent ‘‘nonadjunctive’’ one, according to which the closure
of a set of claims under conjunction is not implied by the set (Brown 1990, pp.
289–292). We noted before that such logics fall outside the ‘‘positive-plus’’
approach, and the particular form of nonadjunctive logic chosen in this case is
that constructed by Schotch and Jennings, which allows an inconsistent
premise set to have consequences that are not consequences of any particular
member of that set (1980).10
    As in Priest’s case, Brown draws on the example of Bohr’s theory to il-
lustrate this approach (Brown 1993).11 In particular, he claims that Bohr was
very careful to distinguish the contexts in which his contradictory principles
were to be applied. Thus, on Bohr’s model an electron in a hydrogen atom
could exist in one or another of a discrete set of orbits or ‘‘stationary states.’’
Classical mechanics could then be applied to account for the dynamical
equilibrium of the electron in one of these stationary states but not to tran-
sitions between states, where the relation between the amount of energy and
frequency of radiation emitted is given by Planck’s formula (Bohr 1981, p.
167). Hence Bohr effectively adopted a ‘‘patchwork’’ approach, and Brown
quotes from a well-known letter in which Bohr eschews a general foundation
for his model and suggests that ‘‘the possibility of a comprehensive picture
should perhaps not be sought in the generality of the points of view, but
rather in the strictest possible limitation of the applicability of the points of
view’’ (Bohr 1981, p. 563).12
    As Brown notes, ‘‘This combination of classical and non-classical principles
is a logically risky game. Whatever form of commitment to these principles
Bohr was proposing, it was not a commitment closed under the classical
consequence relation’’ (1993, p. 399). Nevertheless, commitment there was,
and Brown cites cases involving the conﬁrmation of the theory by various
pieces of evidence in which what he calls ‘‘literal commitment’’ played an
important role (1993, p. 400).13 ‘‘Literal commitment’’ involves belief in the
truth of the separate components, or ‘‘patches,’’ of the theory. According to
Brown, then, Bohr was clearly committed to both the quantization of radia-
tion energy and classical physics. Applying a classical closure relation on this
set of inconsistent commitments, under which there is adjunction so that
truth is effectively distributed, leads to triviality. Hence Brown advocates the
imposition of a nonadjunctive logic that supplies a nontrivial form of closure:
‘‘This modest proposal regarding closure allows us to take Bohr’s commitment
to these inconsistent principles seriously and at face value, without regarding
him as committed, implicitly, to anything and everything’’ (1993, p. 405).
    Its modesty notwithstanding, this proposal is not unproblematic. As we
shall see, Brown has chosen his case study very wisely, but it is not at all clear
whether this nonadjunctive approach can be applied to other examples of


88 Science and Partial Truth
inconsistent theories for which there is not such a clear separation of contexts.
First of all, Brown is keen to stress how his approach accounts for the de-
velopment of new applications of an inconsistent theory: ‘‘When previously
accepted techniques were not sufﬁcient, the theory was extended by drawing
on related classical results, care always being taken to avoid bringing in
anything that would raise the theory’s degree of incoherence’’ (1993, p. 409).
The obvious response is to interpret such extensions as being based on certain
fundamental analogies, but to this Brown replies that ‘‘without some sort of
commitment to classical physics, the practice of continually drawing on it for
such analogies seems odd at best’’ (1993, p. 409). The point then is the
commitment to classical physics, but our point precisely concerns the nature
of this commitment and, in particular, its involvement with truth.
    This goes to the heart of the nonadjunctive approach, as Schotch makes it
clear that in the partitioning of a set of inconsistent statements, the ‘‘cells’’ of
this partition must be regarded as true (Schotch 1993, p. 423; cf. Brown
1993, p. 404). Thus for this approach to be applicable to Bohr’s theory, the
contextually separated ‘‘principles’’ of this theory-that is, classical dynamics
and Planck’s law-must likewise be taken as true. Now one might respond
that classical dynamics should not, and could not, by Bohr, be regarded as
true precisely because of the development of quantum theory. But of course,
Brown would respond that the point is that classical dynamics should be
taken as true in the appropriate context from which quantum theory is excluded.
Bohr’s commitment to classical dynamics therefore involves belief that this
aspect of classical physics is true, but the commitment is contextual, while his
commitment to his atomic model nonadjunctively spans the contexts but
involves only belief ‘‘as if’’ the model were true.
    It is in this respect that Brown’s proposal bears a close resemblance to ours.
However, the crucial difference is that on our account Newtonian mechanics is
regarded ‘‘as if’’ it were true, rather than true per se, within its limited domain,
and this helps express what we mean when we say that it should be taken as
pragmatically true only. And this difference reﬂects a more fundamental dis-
tinction with regard to the role of the domains or contexts in each case. In
ours, the domain is invoked to block claims that Newtonian mechanics should
not be regarded as true in any sense, pragmatic or otherwise, but should
simply be dismissed as false outright. In Brown’s case, the domain, or context,
is structurally incorporated within Bohr’s model and reﬂected in the division of
adjuncts. This aspect then gives rise to a more profound criticism of the
nonadjunctive approach as applied to scientiﬁc theories and models.
    The central point of this criticism is that if inconsistent theories are to be
regarded as structurally fragmented in this way, it is difﬁcult to see how they
can still be regarded as coherent theories (Priest and Routley 1984, p. 8). In
what sense is such a collection of ‘‘contexts’’ or ‘‘cells’’ an integrated unit?
One sense of understanding ‘‘integration’’ and ‘‘coherence’’ here is in terms of
the ‘‘overall truth’’ of the theory. Thus, another striking example of incon-
sistency in the ‘‘old’’ quantum theory is Planck’s original derivation of the
blackbody radiation law, which involved contradictory classical and quantum
hypotheses concerning the energy exchanges between the resonators of the


                                                    Inconsistency in Science     89
blackbody and the radiation ﬁeld itself. Norton has considered the suggestion
that this derivation may also be accommodated within a nonadjunctive
framework but concludes that Wien’s Law, the classical expression for the
energy density and the quantized formula for the average energy of a re-
sonator were in fact conjoined to obtain Planck’s law (Norton 1987). From the
distributed truth of the former principles, he argues, the collective truth of the
conjunction expressed in the latter was inferred. Hence adjunction was not
abandoned in this case.
   However, an adherent of the nonadjunctive approach might contend that
coherence and integration are more profoundly understood in this context in
terms of deductive closure. The critical standpoint from which to judge whether
a set of claims constitutes a coherent theory is that which relates to the
cognitive commitments of the scientiﬁc community. Brown’s central point is
that there was cognitive commitment to Bohr’s theory, which can be un-
derstood as a closed set of claims, with the inherent inconsistency forcing this
closure to be represented paraconsistently. In this essentially nonclassical
sense, we have integration and coherence.
   However, one may wonder if it is even possible to effect the clear-cut
division between different ‘‘contexts’’ or ‘‘subsets’’ within a theory that this
account requires. Brown does at least acknowledge the difﬁculty, noting,
   When we accept claims in this way, we are committed to giving systematic
   division of the contexts in which the incompatible claims will have their
   roles. This division must allow for closure of the contexts of acceptance
   under combination. And it must have some connection with the evidence
   we are able to give for the claims in question: the division of contexts should
   allow us to use particular claims in the contexts where we ﬁnd evidence
   conﬁrming those claims. (Brown 1990, p. 288)
As we have said, Bohr’s theory or model of the atom offers the best possible
case study for the nonadjunctive account because Bohr himself talked of
pulling back from generality in favor of the ‘‘strictest possible limitation’’ of
the principles in conﬂict. However, even here we question, ﬁrst of all, whether
there was quite the ‘‘systematic division’’ of contexts that this approach re-
quires and, second, whether Bohr’s contextualism should be understood at
the level that Brown intends-that is, at the level of inconsistency in the
mathematical formalism or, instead, at that of ‘‘paradox’’ in the interpreta-
tion. Let us now consider this example in more detail.
   Conjointly with his nonadjunctive account of cognitive commitment,
Brown offers a ‘‘schematic account’’ of how Bohr reasoned with his theory,
which goes like this:

   OQT [Old Quantum Theory] involved extensive use of classical mechanics
   and electrodynamics together with quantum restrictions inconsistent with
   classical physics. It included explicit conditions restricting the application of
   the conﬂicting principles. While applications of the theory involved incon-
   sistent principles at various points, the inconsistencies were isolated in sepa-
   rate sub contexts. Within these sub contexts the principles were treated as
   though true, and consequences deduced. Some of these consequences


90 Science and Partial Truth
   served in turn as input for calculations carried out in other sub contexts,
   using other, incompatible principles.. . . The isolated commitments were
   kept separate within their cells, but some consequences inferred within
   those cells were allowed into the store of general commitments. These
   consequences were then available for use in other cells, or for direct em-
   pirical prediction and explanation. So long as the commitments imported
   into each cell are consistent with the isolated commitments within them,
   logical catastrophe can be avoided. (1993, p. 404)

    In other words, consequences, typically involving physical quantities, de-
duced within one isolated context could be used as input for the deduction of
consequences and calculation of quantities within another isolated context.
Thus, for example, classical mechanics was employed together with quantized
angular momentum to calculate the energy levels of a one-electron atom.
These give rise to energy differences that determine the frequency of light
emitted as an electron drops from a higher to a lower level, in accordance with
Planck’s law. Note that the restrictions on the import and export of con-
sequences between contexts must be tighter than merely demanding that an
exported calculation be consistent with the claims of the context it is being
imported into. This is where the nonadjunctive account of the consequence
relation comes into play, imposing the requirement that such import-export
moves must not increase the ‘‘degree of incoherence’’ of a set of claims (Brown
1993, pp. 406–407).
    Our concern is with the systematic division into contexts and with the
question of whether it actually holds in this case. Bohr actually presented
three different treatments of the hydrogen atom (see Pais 1991, pp. 146–
152), but what they all have in common is the postulate that an electron in
such an atom is restricted to one or other of a discrete set of orbits or ‘‘sta-
tionary states.’’ Now Brown emphasizes the point that classical mechanics
was taken to apply to the dynamics of the electron in its stationary state,
while quantum theory was brought into play when the transition between
discrete states was considered-this discreteness contradicting classical phys-
ics, of course-and this certainly does seem to mesh nicely with the non-
adjunctive view. However, it is not only in the discreteness of the states that
we have conﬂict between quantum and classical physics but also in what has
been called ‘‘one of the most audacious postulates ever seen in physics’’ (Pais
1991, p. 147)-namely, the assertion that the ground state was stable, so
that an electron in such a state would not radiate energy and spiral into the
nucleus as determined by classical physics. This is the central inconsistency of
the Bohr model, but it is there right in the heart of the context in which the
governing principles are those of classical dynamics.14 Of course, in applying
and developing the old quantum theory, Bohr, Ehrenfest, Sommerfeld,15 and
others imported and employed claims from classical mechanics-this was
characteristic of the ‘‘old’’ quantum theory, and indeed this was surely the
only way to proceed, at least until the work of Schrödinger and Heisenberg-
but Bohr’s theory cannot be so easily broken down into distinct contexts or
‘‘cells,’’ to each of which one can systematically assign principles held as
true.16


                                                  Inconsistency in Science       91
    What about the famous remark, so redolent of Bohr’s later Com-
plementarity Principle, to the effect that we must seek the ‘‘strictest possible
limitation’’ of the applicability of contradictory points of view? From his
nonadjunctive perspective, Brown reads this as a means of dealing with
inconsistency by appropriately restricting the applicability of classical and
quantum principles. However, throughout the further development and
application of his model, Bohr was greatly concerned with its logical con-
sistency.17 Indeed, this appeared to be his ultimate goal, and like the ma-
jority of physicists at that time, he believed that such a goal would be
reached only through a succession of approximations to his model by means
of the correspondence principle. He was prepared to accept that these steps
along the way might be inconsistent themselves, but this was justiﬁed as
long as they were seen to be pointing in the right direction (Mehra and
Rechenberg 1982, 4:273–274). However, by 1925 Bohr had concluded that
his program had foundered and that this way of approaching the issue simply
would not work: ‘‘He had become convinced that a major advance was nec-
essary and that it would consist in formulating a mathematically consistent
scheme, one in which the conﬂict between classical physics and quantum
theory would be removed in one single step’’ (Mehra and Rechenberg 1982,
p. 274).
    The major advance came in the form of the ‘‘new’’ quantum mechanics of
Heisenberg, Born, Jordan, and Dirac, which was indeed mathematically
consistent but still contained incongruences at the ‘‘interpretational’’ level,
where it was unclear how to understand the dual wave and particular aspects
of quantum phenomena. Bohr referred to these incongruences as ‘‘higher’’
(Mehra and Rechenberg 1982) or ‘‘apparent’’ inconsistencies (Havas 1993)
and was willing to accept them as an integral part of the ‘‘ﬁnal’’ theory.18
Indeed, his Complementarity Principle enshrined this interpretational incon-
sistency as a fundamental aspect of our understanding of quantum phe-
nomena, deriving, as he took it, from the classical nature of measurement
results in terms of which we have no choice but to communicate that un-
derstanding. Here, then, we do have a division into contexts, with the
‘‘strictest possible limitation’’ of the applicability of the space-time and causal
pictures, but it is at the ‘‘higher’’ level of interpretation and one that has come
increasingly under attack at that.
    This separation of ‘‘higher’’ or ‘‘apparent’’ inconsistencies from the or-
dinary kind is interesting, and the monikers are signiﬁcant. They mark a
crucial distinction between the ‘‘old’’ quantum theory and the new quantum
mechanics: In the former, the inconsistency was enmeshed not simply within
the mathematical formalism but within this formalism as interpreted by a
uniform ontological picture (corpuscular). In the latter, however, there was a
consistent mathematical treatment-and in particular no division of ‘‘con-
texts’’ at this level of structure-but no uniform ontological picture and hence
conﬂict at this level. It is precisely this separation, of course, that generated
the positivist attitude toward the new theory.
    A further way of marking the separation is to refer to these ‘‘higher’’ in-
consistencies as ‘‘paradoxes,’’ or, as we have termed them, ‘‘incongruences.’’


92 Science and Partial Truth
In their extensive history of the development of quantum physics, Mehra and
Rechenberg note,

   Since the end of 1925 there had come about a clear recognition of the
   difference between a paradox implied in the description of quantum phe-
   nomena and an inconsistency of the mathematical scheme employed. Niels
   Bohr and the quantum physicists learned that an inconsistency was much
   worse than a paradox. A paradox might be very disagreeable, but still one
   could set up a theory from which the results would follow in a logical way,
   so that two results would never contradict each other. (1982, 4:274)

This dawning recognition can be attributed to the mathematicians at Göt-
tingen, led by Hilbert, who played an interesting and not entirely clear role in
these developments. Heisenberg, in particular, was concerned that the non-
commutativity of conjugate quantum mechanical variables might lead to
mathematical contradictions and is recorded as saying,

   I remember that in being together with young mathematicians and listen-
   ing to Hilbert’s lectures, I heard about the difﬁculties in mathematics. There
   it came up for the ﬁrst time that one could have axioms for a logic that was
   different from classical logic and still was consistent. That, I think, was just
   the essential step [in physics]. You could think just in this abstract manner
   of mathematicians, and you could think about a scheme that was different
   from the other logic,19 and still you could be convinced that you would
   always get consistent results. (Mehra and Rechenberg 1982, pp. 229–230)

He then goes on to make this distinction between paradox and inconsistency
and remarks, ‘‘Only gradually did the idea develop in the minds of many
physicists that we can scarcely describe nature without having something
consistent, but we may be forced to describe nature by means of an axiomatic
system which was thoroughly different from the old classical physics and even
using a logical system which was different from the old one’’ (Mehra and
Rechenberg 1982, p. 230).
    Noncommutativity of variables was not such a big deal to the mathema-
ticians, as Hilbert had already described axiomatic systems for noncommuting
mathematical objects (Mehra and Rechenberg 1982). The precise nature of
quantum logic has been the subject of a great deal of work in the foundations
of physics, but the division of contexts when it comes to the application of the
theory and on which the nonadjunctive approach is grounded simply does not
feature in these developments. Nevertheless, the ‘‘higher’’ inconsistency or
paradox of wave-particle duality was still bothersome: ‘‘The contradictions in
the intuitive interpretations of phenomena occurring in the present scheme
[of quantum mechanics] are totally unsatisfactory. In order to obtain an
intuitive interpretation, free of contradictions, of experiments-which, by
themselves, are admittedly without contradiction-some essential feature is
still missing in our picture of the structure of matter’’ (Mehra and Rechenberg
1982, p. 278). This ‘‘essential feature’’ was subsequently provided by the
uncertainty relations, which, of course, formed the mathematical core of
Bohr’s complementarity interpretation. At this level, we do have a kind of


                                                      Inconsistency in Science        93
division of contexts, delineated by the uncertainty relations themselves, but it
is not the kind that Brown seeks.
   What are we to make of all this? It seems that from early on in the
development of his program, Bohr was concerned with its logical consistency
and came to realize that this could not be achieved by piecemeal steps but
only by a revision of the very foundations of the ﬁeld.20 The ‘‘strictest possible
limitation’’ on the applicability of classical and quantum principles was nec-
essary within the context of the 1913 model in order to obtain meaningful
empirical results, but we reject the view that these limitations correspond to a
clear and well-marked division of contexts. Rather the situation appeared to
be much more ﬂuid, and it was only as agreement with experiment was
obtained that it became clear which principles could be applied and where.
Here the inconsistency was problematic precisely because it was situated
within the mathematics as interpreted by a single ontological picture (es-
sentially of the atom and its constituents as corpuscular). With the advent of
quantum mechanics, we obtain a consistent mathematical scheme (and
perhaps an underlying nonclassical logic) but with a ‘‘paradox’’ in the in-
terpretation. Here the ‘‘higher’’ inconsistency is dealt with by the strictest
possible limitations, not on the applicability of classical and quantum prin-
ciples, but on that of different ontological pictures, particlelike and wavelike.


   Content and Closure

The alternative to the ‘‘logic-driven control’’ of logical anarchy is the so-called
content-driven view. According to this, the attitude of scientists to incon-
sistency is based simply on ‘‘a reﬂection of the speciﬁc content of the physical
theory at hand’’ (Norton 1993, p. 417). Thus Norton argues that in the case
of the quantum theory of blackbody radiation a consistent subtheory can be
constructed from which Planck’s law can be recovered. However, that this is
possible with hindsight is irrelevant to the question of what attitude should be
adopted toward inconsistent theories before such consistent reconstructions
have been identiﬁed (see Brown 1990, p. 292; Smith 1988b, fn. 20). The
difﬁculties are revealed when we reﬂect on the following comment:

   If we have an empirically successful theory that turns out to be logically
   inconsistent, then it is not an unreasonable assumption that the theory is a
   close approximation of a logically consistent theory which would enjoy
   similar empirical success. The best way to deal with the inconsistency would
   be to recover this corrected, consistent theory and dispense with the in-
   consistent theory. However, in the case in which the corrected theory
   cannot be identiﬁed, there is another option. If we cannot recover the entire
   corrected theory, then we can at least recover some of its conclusions or
   good approximations to them, by means of meta-level arguments applied to
   the inconsistent theory. (Norton 1993, pp. 417–418)21

Although we agree that inconsistent theories in science typically point the
way to a consistent successor-an agreement on which we shall expand


94 Science and Partial Truth
later-the delineation of this consistent successor can be an immensely
complicated process involving a variety of heuristic moves. In many and
perhaps most cases, picking out the subtheory from which this successor has
sprung can be achieved only with hindsight and, as we have just said, this
gives no clue as to how inconsistent theories should be regarded epistemically.
    Norton’s emphasis on a ‘‘content-driven’’ approach also carries with it
problems concerning how we identify and understand the ‘‘speciﬁc content of
the physical theory at hand.’’ Here issues as to the metalevel delineation and
characterization of scientiﬁc theories come to the fore. As well as the old
quantum theory of blackbody radiation, Newtonian cosmology affords an-
other example of inconsistency, since we can combine standard theorems of
this theory to conclude that the force on a test mass is both F and not equal to
F, where F is a force of some nominated magnitude and direction (Norton
1993). Responding to this, Malament has argued that the inconsistency is
merely an artifact of traditional formulations of Newtonian cosmology that
disappears if one adopts a ‘‘geometrized’’ version (Malament 1995). Crucially,
this reformulation leaves all the observational consequences of the theory
unaffected.
    In counterresponse, Norton has accepted this ‘‘repair’’ of the theory but
insists that, nevertheless, in its traditional form it remains ‘‘paradoxical’’
(Norton 1995, p. 511).22 This further reinforces our point: That a consistent
reformulation of an inconsistent theory can be subsequently achieved offers
no insight into the attitude(s) adopted toward the theory at the time, except
insofar as it undermines the neo-Hegelian line. Asserting that scientists reﬂect
upon the physical content of the inconsistent theory merely expresses the
heuristic aspects of the situation and says nothing about the more funda-
mental epistemic attitudes.
    Indeed, Norton makes the standard (realist) assumption that theories are to
be taken as true in the correspondence sense (cf. fn. 18); this is what he means
when he talks of ‘‘distributed truth’’ in the example of the old quantum
theory. But again, leaving aside our advocacy of quasi truth in these sorts of
situations, such talk of truth appears profoundly inappropriate in the case of
the Bohr model, where Landé reports that Bohr ‘‘always had the idea that it
was makeshift and something provisional’’ (cited in Pais 1991, p. 155).
Granted this point, for our purposes what is important about Norton’s anal-
ysis is the tracing of the interconnections between the various components of
these theories, which blur any clear-cut distinction between ‘‘contexts’’ or
‘‘cells’’ (and, of course, which distribute truth, on his account) and which
encourage the perception of theories as fundamentally integrated.
    Such integration also runs counter to the claims of another adherent to the
‘‘content-driven’’ view, whose work bears close comparison to that of Brown
but who, crucially, rejects any suggestion that paraconsistent logic might
be usefully employed in this context. Thus Smith has argued that, with regard
to the drawing of inferences from inconsistent sets of beliefs, the latter can
be broken up into (self-) consistent subsets from each of which implications
can be derived in classical fashion (Smith 1988a; see also Kyburg 1987).
Concerning the adjunction of these subsets, however, he rejects the use of


                                                  Inconsistency in Science   95
paraconsistent logics, preferring, instead, to abandon the requirement of de-
ductive closure in such cases altogether. As we shall see, this is tied in with
Smith’s view of the appropriate attitude that should be taken toward incon-
sistency in science, but it is worth noting here his emphasis that acceptance of
closure should not be confused with inference. In particular, against attempts
such as Priest’s to produce convincing examples of true inconsistent theories
from scientiﬁc practice, Smith argues that these have confused the relevant
domains for the application of deductive and inductive inferences, respectively
(1988a).
    As in the case of nonadjoined contexts, the question immediately arises: If
we are not committed to the deductive closure of a set of statements, in what
sense does such a set constitute a coherent, uniﬁed theory? Smith avoids the
problem on this point by referring to inconsistent proposals as ‘‘prototheories’’
(1988a, p. 246).23 Thus, like Norton, Smith draws on the example of the
‘‘old’’ quantum theory; however, whereas Norton was primarily concerned
with reconstructing a consistent formulation of this theory, Smith is quite
clear that his focus is on the issue of the grounds for believing that such
formulations even exist when all that a scientist has is the original incon-
sistent ‘‘proposal’’ (1988b, p. 435, fn. 20).24 As Einstein clearly saw, Planck’s
inconsistent derivation of the blackbody radiation law was inadequate but
also contained an element of truth (Smith 1988b, p. 435).25 This was sub-
sequently expressed in Einstein’s famous 1917 paper on the spontaneous and
stimulated emission of radiation as the conditions for equilibrium between
emission and absorption processes that would have to be obeyed by both
classical and quantum treatments (Smith 1988b, pp. 436–437). However,
although Planck’s inconsistent treatment contained this ‘‘element of truth,’’
Smith prefers not to regard it as a fully ﬂedged theory. Relatedly, he argues
that we need something weaker than acceptance to refer to the attitude
adopted toward such ‘‘proposals.’’ We shall question these distinctions in
what follows, but for the moment we would like to focus on the abandonment
of deductive closure: From a formal perspective, it is this that marks out a
‘‘prototheory’’ and also prevents us from adopting an attitude of acceptance
toward it.
    Smith would certainly agree with Brown’s requirement that the division
into contexts of subsets should be such as to allow one to use certain claims in
those subsets where they are supported by evidence. However, it might be
asked whether, without the imposition of closure, this is sufﬁcient to prevent
the division into subsets from becoming an unsystematic affair, with ‘‘any-
thing goes’’ being the order of the day with regard to the application of claims
from these subsets. Certainly, abandoning closure is a radical move to make
under any circumstances, and one might wonder whether the price of doing
so is lower than that incurred by introducing nonclassical logics! On this
issue, as he himself acknowledges, Smith is following the lead of Harman, who
rejects the principle that our belief set should be closed under logical im-
plication on the grounds that we are not logically omniscient: We are capable
of holding only a ﬁnite number of ‘‘explicit’’ beliefs,26 and many implications
of our beliefs are not immediately obvious (Harman 1986, chapter 2).27 This


96 Science and Partial Truth
is used to support Harman’s overall view that ‘‘there is no clearly signiﬁcant
way in which logic is specially relevant to reasoning’’28 (Harman 1986, p.
20). Presumably, Smith would not wish to go so far, abandoning as he does
(deductive) logic for inconsistent ‘‘prototheories’’ only.
    Logical omniscience is one of the fundamental ‘‘hidden’’ principles un-
derlying philosophical accounts of belief and belief change that many have
started to question and reject as hopelessly idealistic. Here we simply wish to
note two things: The ﬁrst is the connection with inconsistency in science.
Norton puts it very well:

   In traditional philosophy of science, we routinely attribute powers to sci-
   entists that are near divine. It is only in desperate circumstances that we
   may even entertain the possibility that scientists are not logically omnis-
   cient and do not immediately see all the logical consequences of their
   commitments. The inhabitants of the grubby world of real science fall far
   short of this ideal. In truth they will routinely commit themselves con-
   sciously and even enthusiastically to the great anathema of philosophers: a
   logically inconsistent set of propositions. (1993, p. 412)

Likewise, Kyburg has bluntly asserted that the ‘‘demand for consistency is
appropriate for angels, not men’’ (1987, p. 141).
    Second, a lack of logical omniscience can, in fact, be accommodated within
a coherent formal system by introducing a notion of truth related to that of
‘‘pragmatic truth,’’ as we shall indicate in chapter 7 (da Costa and French
1988; see also da Costa and French 1991a). It does not follow, therefore, that
because we are not omniscient in this respect, we must give up deductive
closure. Of course, the sense of closure that is retained may not be classical,
and here Smith and Harman may wish to offer further objections. At this
point, the possibility of question begging by both sides looms. Smith wants to
show that we can accommodate inconsistency in science without introducing
an underlying paraconsistent logic; the price of such an accommodation is the
twin distinctions between theories and ‘‘prototheories’’ and acceptance of the
former and ‘‘entertainment’’ of the latter. Our contention is that we can avoid
paying such a price by regarding theories, models, whatever, as only quasi-
true, partially deﬁned, and so on, and tying our notion of acceptance to that.
We shall explain what we mean after we have considered the relationship
between closure and commitment a little more closely.


   Closure and Commitment

What the failure of logical omniscience says is that, given a set of beliefs that
are held, there are many consequences of these beliefs that are not, and
cannot be, consciously held, or of which we are not explicitly aware, due to
the ﬁnite nature of our minds. However, this does not imply a lack of com-
mitment to such consequences. If it did, the whole notion of revising our sets
of beliefs in the light of their consequences would make little sense. (This is
particularly crucial in the scientiﬁc context, where such consequences are not


                                                  Inconsistency in Science       97
always immediately drawn; we shall draw on this point in chapter 7.) Since it
is this aspect of commitment that distinguishes acceptance from (factual)
belief, it would seem that our lack of logical omniscience could be acknowl-
edged, while at the same time retaining the view that the set of propositions
we accept is closed under (some form of) logical implication.29 Thus, as Cohen
remarks:

   While the direct act of acceptance involves a conscious and voluntary choice
   of a premiss or premisses, a person may be said to accept indirectly all the
   logical or mathematical consequences of any conjunction of the propositions
   that he accepts directly, whether or not he is himself conscious of those
   consequences or disposed to work them out. That is because, when p entails q
   and he decides to adopt the policy of taking p as a premiss, he stays effectively
   on course by taking q as a premiss, because anything that follows from q will
   also follow from p. So, if he announces to other people that he has accepted
   certain propositions, he implies acceptance also of their logically or mathe-
   matically necessary consequences or equivalents, and thus creates a pre-
   sumption about how he will think and act. And, even if he does not announce
   to others his decision to accept that p, this decision certainly reaches in-
   deﬁnitely far. . .beyond any consequences or equivalents that he may per-
   ceive at the moment. (1989, pp. 370–371; cf. Brown, 1990, p. 290, fn. 14)

We have already noted that the failure of logical omniscience can be accom-
modated within formal systems, which, contrary to Harman, are deductively
closed, in some sense. The systems we are referring to are, of course, non-
classical, and the closure is with respect to logical consequence, deﬁned in a
nonclassical fashion. Let us be more speciﬁc and consider again the relation-
ship between belief and truth.
    The work of Brown, Norton, and Smith has been developed within the
warp and weft of two philosophical frameworks, one structural and the other
epistemic. The ﬁrst is the syntactic view of theories as sets of propositions, and
the second is the standard conception of the relationship between belief and
correspondence truth. From the perspective of the former, this set of propo-
sitions is taken to be closed in the sense that any subset of true propositions
logically implies another true proposition (recall Smith’s understanding of
‘‘theory’’). The latter, we recall, holds that to believe that p is to believe that p
is true. Putting the two together means the closure of the former spills over
into the latter: Closure of true propositions gives closure of beliefs about those
propositions. Thus Brown, who regards the propositions within particular
contexts as true and strives to maintain a broadly realist attitude toward
inconsistency, retains closure, even if the nonadjunctive fragmentation of a
theory means it must take a paraconsistent form. Smith, on the other hand,
has no such pretensions and advocates an ‘‘instrumentalist’’ view in which
inconsistent ‘‘proposals’’ are not even theories at all and are ‘‘entertained’’
rather than accepted; thus he is quite happy to drop closure altogether.
    The manner in which the properties of truth ﬁlter up through these
channels to belief can be illustrated through a consideration of the question of
whether belief in a contradiction implies inconsistent beliefs:


98 Science and Partial Truth
   In formal terms, a belief in a contradiction can be written as

Bðp & e pÞ

or, under natural presuppositions,

Bp & B e p

where B is the doxastic operator. If belief is taken to be ‘‘exclusive,’’30 so that
believing that not-p implies not believing that p,31 that is B  p implies Bp,
then we obtain

Bp & e Bp

Hence the inconsistency spreads from the propositions to the belief states
themselves, and holding a contradictory belief becomes equivalent to holding
inconsistent beliefs.
   Now consider truth. It is usually accepted that

Te p ! e Tp

In other words, truth is also regarded as exclusive. If we further take ‘‘belief
that p’’ as shorthand for ‘‘belief that p is true,’’ we get:

BT e p ! B e Tp

from which we obtain

B e Tp ! e BTp

Dropping the Ts gives us

B e p ! e Bp

Thus the exclusive nature of belief seems to follow from that of truth, together
with the standard understanding of ‘‘belief that p.’’ We might say that there is
nothing inherent in belief itself that causes it to be exclusive; it’s all in the
propositions and whether they are regarded as true or not.
   Dropping this connection between belief and truth in favor of some weaker
epistemic attitude, such as that associated with ‘‘partial’’ truth, then allows us
to deny the previous equivalence and block the spread of inconsistency. A
scientist who accepts an inconsistent theory, such as Bohr’s, can therefore be
said to believe in a (self-) contradictory theory but not to hold inconsistent
beliefs. A logic of science suitable for accommodating such a situation should
thus include as a principle:

e ðBp & e BpÞ
It turns out that a form of paraconsistent doxastic logic can be developed that
can accommodate

Bðp & e pÞ



                                                    Inconsistency in Science    99
but has the previous principle as a theorem (da Costa and French 1989b).
What this means is that when we reason about our own beliefs, our ‘‘ex-
ternal’’ logic is classical, whereas our ‘‘internal’’ logic is paraconsistent.32
    The technical details are not so important at this point. What is important
is that at the level of representational belief, such a belief in a self-contra-
dictory theory can be held without degenerating into the holding and not
holding of a belief. This is not the case at the level of ‘‘factual’’ beliefs, where
we have the isomorphic representation of ‘‘the facts’’ and belief that p is
understood as belief that p is true. In other words, factual beliefs are exclusive,
and at this level the inconsistency spreads from the objects of belief through
the belief set itself.33
    The logic of scientiﬁc acceptance, then, is paraconsistent; indeed, it can be
shown that it is a form of Jaskowski’s discussive logic referred to before (da
Costa, Bueno, and French 1998a). When we reason with consistent premises,
Jaskowski’s logic reduces to the classical form; with inconsistent premises, of
course, it does not. Acceptance, in our terms, is closed under the Jaskowski
system but not in relation to classical logic (unless the theory concerned is
consistent). More precisely, there is no closure under classical conjunction
and material implication, but we can deﬁne ‘‘discussive’’ forms of conjunction
and implication with respect to which acceptance can be regarded as closed. It
is worth noting that there may be inconsistent theories whose ‘‘degree of
inconsistency,’’ as it were (and it makes sense to talk in these terms when one
is considering paraconsistent logics), is so great that they are worthless; one
example might be a theory possessing an axiom of the form p $ p. Hence the
acceptance of inconsistent theories or of theories that are (mutually) incon-
sistent does not imply that we accept everything.
    With these points in mind let us return to the issue of closure. Ullian has
argued that truth and acceptance must be kept separate since truth is de-
ductively closed, whereas ‘‘acceptability is unlikely to have any such closure
property’’ (Ullian 1990, p. 345). The point of making this distinction is to
suggest that perhaps talk of truth should be dropped altogether at the ‘‘higher
theoretical levels’’: ‘‘Some theoretical parts of science are far from the soil of
observation sentences. I have suggested that talk of truth is planted in that
soil, so that the roots of that concept lie far from any points of clear contact
with the trellised vines of highly theoretical physics’’ (Ullian 1990, p. 344).
The conclusion, then, is that perhaps truth may not offer the best vantage
point from which to view the scientiﬁc process (Ullian 1990, p. 345) and that
what is needed is ‘‘a reasonable notion of acceptability to step into the breach’’
(p. 344). However, to disassociate acceptance entirely from truth, even at the
level of the empirical basis, is to open the door to conventionalism. Although
the theoretical parts of the models employed in science appear to reside in the
treetops, they are still connected to their observational roots (even trellised
vines must touch ground somewhere!). Of course, we agree that truth is not
sacrosanct and that talk of it in the strict correspondence sense must be
dropped as inappropriate for those beliefs we deem representational, but still
some form of truth must be retained. As for a ‘‘reasonable notion of accept-
ability,’’ if one persists in regarding this in classical terms only, then the slide


100   Science and Partial Truth
into Harman’s position would seem to be inevitable. To our minds, the con-
sequences of such a view are sufﬁciently disagreeable as to make the alter-
native, nonclassical approach even more attractive.
    Summing up then, we side with Brown against Smith (and Harman) in
agreeing that if the cognitive commitments of scientists are to be taken ser-
iously, some form of closure must be imposed in the context of acceptance.
However, we reject the fragmentation of theories into contexts, cells, subsets,
strands, or whatever, on the grounds, as we indicated, that it fails to capture
the interconnections between different parts of the overall theoretical struc-
ture. Indeed, we suggest that such a division acquires the meager plausibility
it has only because of the association of such contexts or subsets with ‘‘ele-
ments of truth,’’ which are then passed on through theory change. While we
are broadly sympathetic with the sentiments underlying this association, our
claim is that no such division or fragmentation is necessary once we shift to
regarding theories as quasi-true and as accepted as such.



   Inconsistency and Partial Structures

Going back to the formal results displayed previously, we have indicated that
there can be forms of doxastic logic-essentially paraconsistent forms-that
can accommodate a belief in an inconsistency, without it diffusing through a
belief set and rendering that entire set inconsistent. The inconsistency is
contained, as it were, and localized to the objects of belief, rather than the
beliefs themselves. This, we feel, is as it should be; in particular, rather than
having a set of contradictory beliefs, each of which is a belief in some p taken
as true in the correspondence sense, what we have is a belief in an incon-
sistency that can nevertheless be regarded as partially true. And the ultimate
grounds for so regarding a theory are pragmatic, in the broad sense, to do
with the empirical support the theory receives. From our internalist per-
spective, then, we claim that this approach captures the appropriate epistemic
attitude toward inconsistent theories. Furthermore, by localizing the incon-
sistency in this way, our account encourages a focus on the structure of the
inconsistent objects of belief, rather than the nature of the belief set.
    And of course, it is such structural considerations that fall within the
purview of the externalist perspective. From this standpoint, the interesting
issues involve questions such as how inconsistent theories are used for
computational purposes or how such theories might be heuristically fruitful.
Unfortunately, there has been little discussion of these issues within the
semantic or model-theoretic approach. Within this dearth of consideration,
Laymon stands out for declaring that one of the advantages of this approach
to theories is that it ‘‘allows for easy and revealing consideration of compu-
tational concerns and . . . allows for the coherent use within a calculation of
inconsistent theories’’ (Laymon 1988, pp. 262–263). Laymon’s primary
concern is with the way in which theories that are inconsistent with one
another are used to account for phenomena, rather than the explanatory role


                                                 Inconsistency in Science 101
of internally inconsistent theories themselves (although Laymon has dis-
cussed Stokes’s use of inconsistent principles in the latter’s analysis of pen-
dulum motion; Laymon 1985). Thus he gives a series of examples involving
early analyses of the Michelson-Morley experiment in which, for example, the
Lorentz-Fitzgerald contraction hypothesis was tested on the basis of a de-
termination of interferometer arm length that assumed no contraction, or, in
another case, a ‘‘hybrid’’ analysis was presented that assumed that the re-
ﬂection and refraction of light were independent of any movement through
the ether but that the velocity of light was dependent on such motion (1988;
another example he mentions in passing is that of the well-known relativistic
analysis of the bending of starlight by the sun in which the Schwarzschild
metric is used in combination with a Newtonian analysis of the telescope and
photographic plates).
    Two fundamental points emerge from Laymon’s analysis. The ﬁrst is the
importance of empirical results in overriding any concerns with consistency:
‘‘scientists were primarily interested in the computational consequences of
their assumptions regardless of the consistency of those assumptions when
viewed as sentences of some logical system’’ (1988, p. 262). However, the
existence of inconsistencies can be outweighed in this manner only if the
theory concerned is regarded not as true, in the literal or correspondence
sense, but as partially or approximately so.
    The second point concerns the role of idealizations and approximations in
generating a certain ‘‘looseness of ﬁt’’ between theories and these computa-
tional consequences, sufﬁcient to allow mutually inconsistent theories to be
used.34 Essentially, Laymon’s work can be seen as a further elaboration of the
point emphasized by Thompson (1989)-namely, that the semantic approach
allows for the explanatory deployment of theories from different domains. In
the cases noted before, these domains are fundamentally incompatible with
one another.
    We have already mentioned that idealization and approximation can be
accommodated through the introduction of ‘‘partial isomorphism’’ as the
fundamental relationship-horizontally and vertically-between theoretical
and data models. This also indicates the way in which one can understand
how such ‘‘computational consequences’’ can be obtained from an ‘‘intern-
ally’’ inconsistent theory such as Bohr’s.35 It is by acknowledging that there is
a certain ‘‘looseness of ﬁt’’ between a representation and that which it rep-
resents, that inconsistency can be comfortably accommodated. By introducing
‘‘partial structures’’ into the semantic approach, this notion of a ‘‘looseness of
ﬁt’’ can be formally captured and in a way that reﬂects the doxastic attitudes
of scientists themselves.36 The belief involved is representational in character,
being belief in a representation of semipropositional form. It is the conceptual
incompleteness of such representations that underpins this ‘‘looseness of ﬁt’’
and allows for their acceptance, whether they be internally or mutually in-
consistent.37 Furthermore, this partiality or openness encourages the view
that they should regarded, in general, not merely as steps on the road toward
some complete representation but also as potential heuristic sources for fur-
ther development.38


102   Science and Partial Truth
   The Heuristic Fertility of Inconsistency

If assenting to a set of statements is taken to warrant assent to their deductive
closure, then dropping the latter in cases of inconsistent theories means
coming up with something weaker than unconditional assent itself to refer to
the epistemic attitude that is appropriate in these cases. Thus Smith in-
troduces the notion of ‘‘entertaining’’ hypotheses for their ‘‘pragmatic’’ vir-
tues and states, ‘‘When we have evidence for the truth of each of two
incompatible claims, it is quite rational to entertain both. However, the fact
that they are inconsistent means that we must mentally ﬂag them to guard
against indiscriminate future use. One or the other is false. At best, both can
be ‘‘approximately true,’’ ‘‘partially true’’ or ‘‘true under some disambigua-
tion’’ etc.’’ (1988a, p. 244). Obviously, we would agree with this last line but
would question why an epistemic attitude different from that of acceptance
needs to be marked out for these cases, where acceptance need not be un-
derstood as ‘‘unconditional.’’ It might seem that we merely have a difference
in terminology here-where we use ‘‘acceptance as partially true,’’ Smith uses
‘‘entertainment’’-but the difference is signiﬁcant: As we have already said,
dropping closure puts inconsistent ‘‘proposals’’ beyond the reach of logic al-
together. Thus this position rests on a dichotomy, with on the one side,
consistent theories, accepted as true and subject to classical logic, and on the
other, inconsistent proposals, which are merely entertained and not closed
under logical implication.
    On this view, then, inconsistent proposals do not lie within the domain of
acceptance at all but rather occupy the realm of ‘‘discovery’’ (this is made
clear by Smith himself, 1988a, p. 244). This distinction is another well-
known component of the Received View that has come under attack in the
past thirty years or so. It marks a separation of discovery from justiﬁcation in
terms of rationality: The former ‘‘can be analysed only psychologically, not
logically. . .and cannot be portrayed by a rational procedure’’39 (Reichenbach
1949, p. 434), whereas the opposite is true of the latter, which, indeed, is-or
should be-the sole concern of epistemology (see Reichenbach 1938, p. 7).
The distinction itself has come under pressure from two directions: Historians
and sociologists of science have questioned whether so-called external, social
factors can be contained within ‘‘discovery’’ and have argued that they spill
over into justiﬁcation, collapsing any distinction between the two.40 Moving
the other way, a number of philosophers of science have argued that dis-
covery is susceptible to rational analysis, and Post in particular has carefully
articulated what he calls the ‘‘theoretic’’ guidelines to new theories (1971).41
    Claiming that there is a common epistemic attitude evinced on both sides
blurs the distinction even further and suggests that we should instead refer to
a unitary process of theory ‘‘development.’’ We shall return to this point in
the next chapter; for now, we wish to note that if inconsistent ‘‘proposals’’
have a heuristic role that can be considered by philosophers of science and not
just psychologists, then the grounds for treating them as sharply different
from theories is further eroded. Thus Smith explicitly acknowledges that his
chief concern is with the question of how scientists move from a particular


                                                 Inconsistency in Science 103
inconsistent theory to a consistent successor (1988b, p. 435 fn. 20). But, it
might be argued, if there is a rationale to such moves and, in particular, if this
rationale can be embedded within a general set of such rationales as applied to
the heuristics of theory development in general-that is, covering the devel-
opment of consistent theories as well-then the dichotomy between ‘‘propo-
sals’’ and theories, with closure on the one hand but not on the other, begins
to look distinctly shaky.
    The heuristic role played by inconsistent theories clearly stands in need of
further elucidation. As Post has noted, an inconsistency is usually regarded as
a ‘‘formal ﬂaw’’ that points the way to the construction of a consistent suc-
cessor (Post 1971, pp. 221–225). These ﬂaws, or ‘‘neuralgic points,’’ are
‘‘useful hints of a higher and wider system in which these contradictions are
eliminated’’ (p. 222).42 The process is taken to be analogous to that of moving
from the liar paradox to truth at the metalevel in logic. Of course, a strong
realist when it comes to contradictions, such as Priest, would question pre-
cisely such a move, arguing that truth can be retained at the object level of
the paradox itself.43 An instrumentalist, on the other hand, while dispensing
with truth altogether, would also reject the process wholesale, arguing that
inconsistent theories should not be ruled out as an ultimate objective of sci-
ence.44 Both views disdain the elimination of contradictions that Post empha-
sizes, and both fall afoul of the actual practice of science, where attempts to
move from inconsistency to consistency are clearly evident.
    A crucial role in this process is played by the General Correspondence
Principle, used heuristically in the same sense as discussed in the previous
chapter. The general strategy identiﬁed here is that of ‘‘projection,’’ in the
sense that the scientist ‘‘uses the original [inconsistent] proposal along with
the conﬁrming evidence available for various parts of that proposal to give a
schematic ‘projection’ of what the consistent replacement theory (or some
fragment of that theory) will look like’’ (Smith 1988b, p. 438). The same
strategy is exempliﬁed in Bohr’s use of the correspondence principle and
provides a rational procedure for the heuristic use of inconsistency.45
    In discussing these strategies, it is signiﬁcant that Post highlights the in-
completeness that is an essential aspect of the process, emphasizing,

   This incompleteness of theories, or their openness to growth beyond them-
   selves, is a stronger and more interesting case than just ﬁlling the gaps in the
   data covered by a theory, such as missing elements in the periodic table. Just
   as the system of real numbers is not closed, in the sense that one can for-
   mulate equations in terms of real numbers only whose solutions point outside
   the system, so a physical theory may show its lack of closure. The points at
   which a theory is open, or anomalous, provide a strong indication of the way
   in which the future larger theory is to be built. (Post 1971, p. 222)

For Smith, it is the move by means of ‘‘projection’’ from an inconsistent
‘‘proposal’’ or prototheory to an incomplete but consistent ‘‘fragment’’ of the
successor theory that constitutes an essential step in the heuristic exploitation
of inconsistency. Such fragments are projections of the ‘‘elements of truth’’ of
the prototheory and serve as guides to the completed successor. Our intention


104   Science and Partial Truth
is not to dispute the rich historical analysis that Smith presents in support of
these claims. Certainly, this process of ‘‘projection’’ helps us understand the
way in which consistent theories come to be constructed from their incon-
sistent predecessors.46
    However, we balk at the implication that such incomplete ‘‘fragments’’
effectively stood in for the inconsistent proposals, and that scientists like
Einstein and Bohr ‘‘made deductions not from an inconsistent but from an
incomplete theory, only parts of which were interpreted’’ (Smith 1988b, p.
443; his emphasis). It is true that they speculated as to which well-conﬁrmed
fragments of the old quantum theory would be retained by any future theory,
but what they reasoned from and drew inferences from were the inconsistent
models or theories themselves. Structurally, these were both inconsistent and
incomplete in that with the inconsistency we do not know whether the
relevant properties and relations hold in the domain or not; as Post says, the
points where a theory is anomalous are also those where it is open. And, of
course, this openness or lack of closure (this time, of the theory itself as
viewed from our extrinsic perspective) is representable model-theoretically by
a partial structure.47 The way in which this openness is exploited heur-
istically in general and the manner in which structural relations are im-
ported from one domain to another will be dealt with in the following
chapter.
    Returning to the intrinsic stance, at the heart of Smith’s account lies a
view of acceptance that we ﬁnd simply unacceptable: ‘‘Acceptance of a set of
statements warrants their unrestricted use in all reasoning processes. At least
one member of an inconsistent set of statements must be false. So, without
additional information, we cannot rationally assent to the unconditional use of
any one of the statements from a set known to be inconsistent’’ (Smith 1988b,
p. 432). Leaving aside the observation that this characterization of incon-
sistency begs the question against paraconsistent logics,48 no scientiﬁc theory,
past or present, receives such warrant; there are always hedging conditions,
acknowledgments of limitations, approximations, and the like that are man-
ifestations of the scientists’ doxastic attitudes toward the theory. And these
attitudes are inadequately and incorrectly characterized in terms of belief in
the (correspondence) truth of the theory. What we are about here is precisely
an attempt at the difﬁcult trick of accommodating these weaker attitudes
while retaining the connection between acceptance and belief of some form.49
We prefer to stick to ‘‘acceptance’’ rather than ‘‘entertainment,’’ since even in
the case of inconsistent theories there is still the element of commitment that
we (and Brown) take to be the hallmark of the former (witness Bohr’s ela-
boration and defense of his theory).
    The blurring of the distinction between discovery and justiﬁcation thus
proceeds on two fronts: First of all, heuristic guidelines are admitted, of the
sort delineated by Post, lifting discovery, at least in part, back into the domain
of rationality, and then acceptance is unbound from truth, allowing for that
descriptively important element of fallibility.50 There is then no need for an
alternate term such as ‘‘entertainment’’ since acceptance understood in terms
of partial truth is sufﬁciently broad to do the job in all cases.


                                                  Inconsistency in Science 105
   Conclusion: Between Conservatism and Anarchy

The heuristic fertility of inconsistencies is something that a ‘‘conservative’’
view of scientiﬁc progress fails to acknowledge. According to this tradition,
represented by Popper’s remarks at the beginning of this chapter, the in-
consistency must be removed before any further progress can be made, since it
is irrational to build upon inconsistent foundations (Lakatos 1970, p. 144).
The opposing ‘‘anarchist’’ position, on the other hand, elevates inconsistency
to the status of a fundamental property of nature. It is in just this ground, of
course, that Priest’s approach has its roots. Lakatos’s argument that such an
approach is incompatible with the goal of science being truth (1970, p. 143)
begs the question, since the existence of true contradictions is precisely what
is asserted by the proponents of this position. Nevertheless, as we mentioned
before, such a view fails to do justice to the doxastic attitudes of scientists
themselves and, ultimately, to the practice of science. For this reason, the
‘‘rationalist’’ position is to be preferred, according to which the heuristic
fruitfulness of an inconsistent theory may be exploited without a concomitant
claim that it is the last word on the matter (Lakatos 1970, p. 145). Of course,
not all inconsistencies are fertile in this sense. Bohr’s ‘‘program’’ began to
degenerate, in Lakatosian terms, as further inconsistencies were piled onto the
original model in an increasingly desperate attempt to deal with the ‘‘un-
digested’’ anomalies that began to proliferate (Lakatos 1970, p. 154).51 Such
inconsistencies failed to extend the ‘‘empirical character’’ of the theory and
can thus be regarded as sterile (p. 154).52
    Summing up, the view we are advocating here can be situated both within
the ‘‘rationalist’’ framework and between the positions of Smith and Brown:
Unlike the former, we retain a unitary epistemic attitude of acceptance and a
concomitant form of closure on the relevant set of beliefs, but we agree on the
heuristic fertility of inconsistency; unlike the latter, we reject the separation of
elements of theoretical structures into incompatible contexts, but we agree that
the appropriate logic of acceptance is broadly paraconsistent, and this accep-
tance involves an underlying commitment. We recall from chapter 4 that on
our account acceptance differs from factual belief in that the former involves
this commitment, whereas the latter does not. It is, however, tied to a rep-
resentational belief in the partial truth of what is accepted, and the commit-
ment is to the use of the representation or model concerned. Certain
inconsistent theories can then be regarded as quasi-true and accepted in this
sense. And the element of truth such theories possess, which ultimately jus-
tiﬁes their acceptance, is not lost but is incorporated within the structure of
their successors in accordance with the General Correspondence Principle.53
    This discussion of the heuristic moves behind theory development is
further broadened in the next chapter, where we return to the externalist
perspective and indicate how such moves can be understood within the
model-theoretic approach.




106   Science and Partial Truth
         6
         PARTIALITY, PURSUIT,
         AND PRACTICE

So far we have focused on two of the central elements of scientiﬁc practice-
namely, theories and models. In the last two chapters in particular, we were
concerned with the attitudes toward these elements and what it is to say that
they are ‘‘accepted.’’ However, in chapter 5, we began to return to broadly
structural considerations as we noted the heuristic force of inconsistencies in
their role as formal ﬂaws. As we indicated there, these considerations, in
alliance with epistemic factors regarding the appropriate attitude toward such
‘‘ﬂawed’’ representations, break down the traditional barrier between ‘‘dis-
covery’’ and ‘‘justiﬁcation.’’ Since this distinction features in the traditional
two-stage picture of scientiﬁc practice, in which theories or models are ﬁrst
‘‘discovered’’ and then ‘‘justiﬁed,’’ we need an alternative picture. Central to
this will be the structural incompleteness of theories or, as Post puts it, ‘‘their
openness to growth beyond themselves’’ (1971, p. 222). Understanding how
this incompleteness is handled will enable us to construct a unitary account of
theory ‘‘development’’ in which theories and models are proposed, developed,
pursued, and justiﬁed in a complex web of structural engagements.
    There is, however, the further question of the driving forces behind this
development. The focus on structural incompleteness brings to the forefront
the structural engines of theory development, contrary to, for example, the
sociology of scientiﬁc knowledge, which emphasizes social interests as heur-
istic ‘‘causes,’’ or more recent accounts of the ‘‘sociology of scientiﬁc prac-
tice,’’ which abandons what is seen as ‘‘reductive determinism’’ entirely and
reverts to some form of ‘‘agency.’’ Here we shall follow Post again by anal-
yzing the heuristics of scientiﬁc practice in terms of the objects of that practice
and their structural qualities. The notion of partial isomorphism will be
crucial to this picture of the development of new theories and models from the
old. Before we get to that point, however, we need to consider and reject both
the ‘‘social interests’’ approach and the more recent ‘‘mangle’’ of scientiﬁc


                                       107
practice, both of which downplay the heuristic force of the structural elements
of theories and models themselves.



   Practice Makes Science

At roughly the same time as the semantic approach emerged, the emphasis on
models took a different form, which, although it can also be seen as a reaction
to the syntactic account of theories and models advocated by the Received
View, declined to adopt a formalized treatment of these notions. The views of
two of the principal ﬁgures in this latter approach-namely, Black and
Achinstein-have already been discussed, and one can further trace its effects
on the recent work of Cartwright, for example. However, Kuhn, whose work-
perhaps more than that of any other philosopher of science-represents the
decisive break with the Received View,1 also placed models at the heart of
scientiﬁc practice. For Kuhn, a model was to be understood in the sense of an
‘‘exemplar’’ that effectively structures solutions to the problems of ‘‘normal’’
science.2
    The extent to which Kuhn’s ideas have had a positive impact on the phi-
losophy of science is debatable (see Suppe 1977, pp. 633–649), but what
cannot be doubted is their profound inﬂuence on sociological accounts.3 More
than the implicit relativism, more than the eschewing of any talk of truth, and
more even than the rather confused but, according to the later Kuhn, central
idea that occupants of different paradigms live in ‘‘different worlds,’’ it is this
notion of exemplars that was taken as fundamental by the advocates of the
sociology of scientiﬁc knowledge,4 perhaps because it indicated a way in
which science could be taken as interestingly rule-free.5 It is the exemplars
that drive the conceptual extensions of the scientiﬁc ‘‘net’’ through the
modeling process:6 the problems and techniques that arise within a scientiﬁc
tradition ‘‘may relate by resemblance and by modeling to one or another part
of the scientiﬁc corpus which the community in question already recognizes
as among its established achievements’’ (Kuhn 1970, pp. 45–46).7 This
process, in turn, is regarded as radically open-ended in the sense that ‘‘the
extension of scientiﬁc culture. . .can plausibly proceed in an indeﬁnite number
of different directions; nothing within the net ﬁxes its future development’’
(Pickering 1992, p. 4; our emphasis; see also p. 9). Indeed, innovation in
science can be attributed to precisely this open-endedness.8
    The all-important question now, of course, is what determines which di-
rection is taken or, equivalently, what does ﬁx the future development of the
‘‘net’’? As far as these sociological accounts are concerned, the answer is
unequivocal: The direction and future development are determined by social
interests. Scientists extend the net, develop their theories or models, in ways
that serve their interests. It is via the mediation of these interests that ‘‘closure’’
is achieved, in the sense of a consensus that closes off certain avenues of further
development.9 Barnes, for example, makes this explicit in a work whose title-
Interests and the Growth of Knowledge-gives the game away: ‘‘new forms of


108    Science and Partial Truth
activity arise not because men are determined by new ideas, but because they
actively deploy their knowledge in a new context, as a resource to further their
interests’’ (Barnes 1977, p. 78). In granting a fundamental role to interests as
the causal base of scientiﬁc practice, the sociology of scientiﬁc knowledge ef-
fectively gave center stage to the role of human agency in science. Thus, in his
sociologically oriented history of high energy physics, Pickering wrote, ‘‘In this
book, the view will be that agency belongs to actors not phenomena: scientists
make their own history, they are not the passive mouthpieces of nature’’
(1984, p. 8).
    More recently, however, Pickering himself has begun to articulate an al-
ternative view that differs in two crucial respects: (1) a shift away from
science-as-knowledge to science-as-practice, with an attendant elaboration of
concepts, which, it is claimed, speak directly to the latter and include the
attribution of a form of agency to the material as well as the human realm and
(2) an insistence on the multiplicity of elements that can account for closure,
linked to a view of the ‘‘net’’ as ‘‘patchy’’ and heterogeneous (see, for example,
Pickering 1992 and 1995a).10 Interests, rather than underpinning practice in
the sense of reducing and explaining it, are now situated within the plane of
practice itself as just one of a variety of sorts of generative factors (see also
Latour 1987). The social is no longer the sacred (cf. Pickering 1995b, p. 465,
fn. 68) or, as Lynch puts it, from his ethnomethodologist’s perspective: ‘‘So-
ciology’s general concepts and methodological strategies are simply over-
whelmed by the heterogeneity and technical density of the language,
equipment, and skills through which mathematicians, scientists, and practi-
tioners in many other ﬁelds of activity make their affairs accountable’’ (Lynch
1992b, p. 299).11
    Nevertheless, and despite these differences, this new approach retains the
dual emphasis on the role of models in extending the net and the open-ended
nature of this process. Indeed, the importance of models is elevated even fur-
ther since, with interests shoved aside, closure must be achieved in some other
way, namely, by the bringing together of various disparate ‘‘extensions,’’ or
models-theoretical, phenomenological, experimental, or whatever-together
into ‘‘association.’’ This is, of course, a nontrivial achievement, and the difﬁ-
culties involved fall under the heading of ‘‘resistances.’’ These arise when
models are brought into interaction in some way, when aspects of one model-
certain fundamental relationships, say-are imported into another, for ex-
ample. Resistance, then, is a manifestation of structural discord, although this
is typically not made at all explicit.
    Still, there is the question of the exact nature of the forces driving these
associations. We must bear in mind that it is of the essence of this new
sociology of scientiﬁc practice to reject any kind of global, homogeneous,
unitary analysis; rather, the forces concerned will be highly localized and
disuniﬁed, varying from situation to situation. Indeed, in summarizing the
paper of a fellow traveler, Pickering expressed the central motif thus: ‘‘If
practice carries within itself a teleological principle of making associations
between disparate cultural elements, there is no need to look outside practice
thus construed for explanations of particular closures in cultural extensions


                                         Partiality, Pursuit, and Practice    109
(though neither, of course, is it forbidden to do so). Practice has its own
integrity, and once we have grasped this integrity, we no longer feel the
need for an explanatory ‘something else’’’ (Pickering 1992, p. 17). Such a
‘‘principle’’ cannot be understood or employed in isolation from the practice
in which it is embedded and in terms of which it gains its sense and meaning
(cf. Lynch 1992a, p. 252). Rather than look to a source of social determi-
nation to explain ‘‘closure’’ in this sense, we should look to the constituent
features of the practice itself. Any question as to how a particular closure was
achieved must be tied to the ‘‘local historicity’’ of the object of that practice
(Lynch 1992a, p. 253). Explanation thus gives way to description: ‘‘De-
scriptions of the situated production of observations, explanations, proofs, and
so forth provide a more differentiated and subtle picture of epistemic activities
than can be given by the generic deﬁnitions and familiar debates in episte-
mology’’ (p. 258; also Lynch 1992b, p. 290).12
    Now although we are sympathetic to certain of the consequences of this
shift away from social interests as central causal elements,13 it is clear that
they are not entirely out of the frame. Scientiﬁc knowledge, on this view, ‘‘is
just one part of the picture, something that is not analytically privileged in
any way, but that evolves in an impure, posthuman dynamics together with
all of the other cultural strata of science-material, human, social’’ (Pickering
1995b, p. 446). Thus we see that it is by no means a case of excising the social
but of placing it on the plane of practice alongside a rich diversity of other
factors and elements, no one set of which is any way privileged. As we shall
see, it is not just this retention of the social but the importance of its role in
goal formation within scientiﬁc practice that makes this view as much as a
target of our concerns as the sociology of scientiﬁc knowledge. The inclusion
of ‘‘agency’’ in this picture encourages-or better, demands-a further shift
away from the representational idiom to the ‘‘performative,’’ which sees
the world as full of agency, both human and nonhuman (Pickering 1995a).
This is another aspect that we shall return to shortly. The role of the rep-
resentational is not denied, but, rather, we are encouraged to be interested in
how the ﬁeld of representations ‘‘is threaded through the machinic ﬁeld of
science, in trying to understand each in relation to the other, rather than
treating the representational aspects of science in isolation’’ (Pickering
1995d, p. 414).14
    There are aspects of this account that are obviously amenable to our more
‘‘traditional’’ way of looking at practice, most notably the emphasis on mod-
eling and open-endedness. However, the introduction of agency obscures the
role of structural considerations in guiding theory development and over-
emphasizes the degree of freedom and choice involved. Let us be clear here: We
do not dispute that practice, construed sufﬁciently broadly, may include social
and other elements. The issue is whether these have any epistemic bearing on
the construction of representations within that practice; if they do not, then
the ‘‘ﬁeld of representations’’ can be considered in isolation. This is indeed
what we shall argue, offering in the place of the performative idiom of agency
and suchlike a structural account of practice. The points of contention will
become clear if we look at Pickering’s work a little more closely:


110   Science and Partial Truth
   The twin emphases on models and open-endedness are clearly laid out in
the following passage:
   A given model can be extended in an indeﬁnite number of ways, nothing
   within the model itself foreshadows which should be chosen. Thus part of
   the problem of getting to grips with practice is that of understanding clo-
   sure, of understanding why some individual or group extends particular
   models in particular ways. The solution to this problem appears to lie in the
   observation that models are not extended in isolation. Modelling typically
   aims at producing associations in which a plurality of projected elements
   hang together in some way. And the important point here is that the
   achievement of such associations is not guaranteed in advance-particular
   modelling sequences readily lead to mismatches in which intended asso-
   ciations are not achieved. Resistances, that is, arise in practice to the
   achievement of goals. Encounters with resistance set in train a process of
   accommodation, in which the openness of modelling is further exploited in
   trial-and-error revisions and substitutions of models, modelling sequences,
   and so on, aimed at proceeding further toward the intended association.
   (Pickering and Stephanides 1992, pp. 140–141)

    There are claims here that are strikingly obvious, and there are claims that
are strikingly problematic, or at least so it seems to us. That models are not
extended in isolation will hardly come as a shock to the system of any but the
most naive student of the ﬁeld. Of course, we may disagree as to the nature and
composition of the embedding context-the extent to which social factors in-
trude, for example-but, at least in this example, the primary concern is with
the contextual role of other models. Likewise, there is little that is controversial
in the assertion, as it stands, that ‘‘resistances’’ arise in practice and are then
dealt with by a process of accommodation.15 From the more conventional
perspective, one obvious and rather stubborn piece of resistance would be the
material world, a.k.a. reality itself, and although Pickering himself could
hardly be expected to accept the latter statement without some qualiﬁcation,
here, too, there are points of contact between us. First, having said what we
have in chapter 3 about the hierarchy of models inserted between the highest
‘‘theoretical’’ representation and the ‘‘phenomena,’’ we would expect this form
of resistance, at least, to be mediated and perhaps also transformed by the
intervening levels. Thus Pickering suggests that we ‘‘think of factual and
theoretical knowledge in terms of representational chains passing through
various levels of abstraction and conceptual multiplicity and terminating, in
the world, on captures and framings of material agency’’ (1995a, p. 145; we
shall brieﬂy consider the notion of material agency shortly).16
    Second, he advocates a kind of ‘‘pragmatic realism,’’ which ‘‘recognises
that the production and transformation of scientiﬁc knowledge in accom-
modation to resistance is inseparable from a larger process of the production
and transformation of complex and heterogeneous forms of life’’ (1990,
p. 688). Although we shall not explore the details here, Pickering inclines
toward a Jamesian form of pragmatism, where the consequences of holding a
belief are cashed out in terms of the differences that makes to what one does,
regardless of how things ‘‘really’’ are, as opposed to a Peircean form, where


                                          Partiality, Pursuit, and Practice    111
these consequences are the differences that truth of the belief makes to what
one does. The difference is crucial since, on the Jamesian reading, the holder
of the belief is the ultimate epistemic authority, whereas the Peircean accepts
that she may not know all the relevant facts that bear on the truth of her
beliefs. Thus situating science within a Jamesian context will encourage one
to adopt a disinterested, descriptivist stance in which no claims to epistemic
authority over the practitioners of science will be asserted. Furthermore,
whereas the Peircean will accept that reality goes beyond what she can an-
ticipate, the Jamesian will admit the presence of the external world only in
those situations where she encounters resistances in her practice, these re-
sistances to be felicitously reinterpreted. But then, of course, if reality is so
conditioned by one’s beliefs, one might wonder how resistance can arise in the
ﬁrst place, a much worn line of criticism that was leveled at James himself. A
similar concern might arise with respect to Pickering’s account of resistance
in practice-and in mathematical or conceptual practice, in particular-but
as we shall see, the invocation of a form of nonhuman agency ensures that
encountering and overcoming resistances is in fact a nontrivial matter.
    Returning to the process of modeling in science, this can be further de-
composed into the triad ‘‘bridging,’’ ‘‘transcription,’’ and ‘‘ﬁlling.’’17 The ﬁrst
involves the construction of a bridgehead as a creative extension from some
base model to the new system. In constructing such an extension, certain
formal associations within the base model will be preserved and ‘‘transcribed’’
into the new one. However, given the differences between the models, such
transcriptions are necessarily partial. As a consequence, gaps in the novel
structure emerge that must then be ‘‘ﬁlled’’ in by drawing on the resources
available. Resistances arise as a result of these differences, differences that
emerge only as the new model or theory is constructed.
    This brings us back to the issue of the nature and source of these ‘‘re-
sistances.’’ What the bridging process does, as we have said, is to import the
basic structural elements of one model into another. Note that what we are
talking about here is importation rather than creation; the domain in question
must be structured to at least some minimal extent before bridging is at-
tempted; otherwise, resistance would simply never arise. In scientiﬁc practice,
we claim that the source of this minimal structure will be ultimately and
broadly empirical, deriving perhaps from low-lying ‘‘phenomenological’’
models, although as we move up the hierarchy the ‘‘degree of contact’’ with
this empirical source will get attenuated. From the perspective of the very
highest theoretical levels, the depth of lower-lying structures at which the
source of resistance can be located depends on the extent of the theory change
in question. In relatively straightforward cases of theory extension, it may be
the very next structures down in the hierarchy that are turned to in order to
serve as the base of the bridgehead. On the other hand, in radical theory
change, such as occurs in scientiﬁc revolutions, for example, continuity must
be sought in structures much further down the ladder; obviously, this sort of
account rejects any notion of incommensurability holding across revolu-
tionary divides.18 Given, then, the existence of this minimal structuring, it is
not that surprising that further elaboration of the imported structure will


112   Science and Partial Truth
encounter ‘‘resistance’’ due to structural incompatibilities.19 Of course, if
these incompatibilities are sufﬁciently extensive, they will prevent the given
importation in the ﬁrst place.
    According to Pickering, seeking some ‘‘accommodation’’ to these re-
sistances then involves ‘‘tinkering’’ with various extensions that are available
in the given conceptual space in a series of ‘‘free’’ and ‘‘forced’’ moves. Thus
transcription can be regarded as a sequence of forced moves, insofar as it
follows ‘‘from what is already established concerning the base model’’
(Pickering and Stephanides 1992, p. 150). Bridging and ﬁlling in, on the
other hand, are ‘‘free’’ moves in that they ‘‘mark tentative choices within the
indeﬁnitely open space of cultural extension’’ (Pickering and Stephanides,
p. 142; our emphasis). ‘‘The outcome of particular modelling sequences is
thus at once structured by choice but not determined by it; it is something
genuinely to be found in practice’’ (p. 142).
    There are two important points to note here. The ﬁrst concerns this issue of
the source of resistance. Pickering characterizes it in terms of the notion of
‘‘disciplinary agency’’: ‘‘It is, I shall say, the agency of a discipline . . . that
leads disciplined practitioners through a series of manipulations within an
established conceptual system’’ (1995b, p. 419). Discipline asserts itself in
transcription and it is here ‘‘where disciplinary agency carries scientists along,
where scientists become passive in the face of their training and established
procedures’’ (Pickering 1995b, p. 420).20 And it is here, as we have just said,
that resistances arise as the disciplinary elements of the practice pushes back,
as it were, against the practitioners.
    The metaphor of ‘‘pushing back’’ is no idle one. For Pickering, disciplinary
agency is the analogue within conceptual practice of material agency within
experimental practice. The material world is a world of forces and elements
beyond human control (cf. 1995a, p. 6), and likewise disciplinary agency
cannot be reduced to the human form at one degree removed: ‘‘The notion of
discipline as a performative agent might seem odd to those accustomed to
thinking of discipline as a constraint upon human agency, but I want (like
Foucault) to recognize that discipline is productive. There could be no con-
ceptual practice without the kind of discipline at issue: there would only be
marks on paper’’ (Pickering 1995b, p. 458, fn. 5).
    As Pickering acknowledges, this attribution of agency to materiel and
discipline owes a great debt to the ‘‘actor-network’’ school of Latour, Callon,
and others (see for example, Latour 1987).21 However, whereas for the latter
the symmetry between human and nonhuman agency derives from a semiotic
analysis that offers a deﬁnition of actant ‘‘devoid of its logo- and anthropo-
centric connotations’’ (Callon and Latour 1992, p. 350), Pickering rejects this
‘‘invocation of an atemporal science of signs’’ (1995a, p. 14) in favor of a view
of material and disciplinary agency as ‘‘temporally emergent’’ in practice.
Again, the openness of practice is brought to the fore as the ‘‘contours’’ of
these agencies cannot be known in advance. Thus what Pickering is inter-
ested in is a temporally informed ‘‘real-time’’ understanding of science that
rejects the idea that we can know in advance the shape of future machines,
models, mathematical objects, or whatever.


                                          Partiality, Pursuit, and Practice    113
    This brings us to the second metric of disagreement between Pickering and
the actor-network school, which concerns the nature of human agency. This
runs parallel to the ‘‘machinic’’ and disciplinary forms, insofar as it, too, can
be repetitive and machinelike and disciplined (1995a, p. 16). However, the
symmetry breaks down over the rocky subject of intentionality, which is used
‘‘in an everyday sense to point to the fact that scientiﬁc practice is typically
organized around speciﬁc plans and goals’’ (Pickering 1995a, p. 17). These
goals and plans are not temporally emergent in the way that disciplinary and
material agency are, since they are ‘‘predisciplined’’ by the culture in which
they are situated. Nevertheless, ‘‘the predisciplining of intent by existing
culture is only partial’’ (Pickering 1995a, p. 19), because of the open-
endedness of modeling. Again, Pickering emphasizes that from a given model,
one can construct an indeﬁnite number of future variants and ‘‘nothing about
the model itself ﬁxes which of them will ﬁgure as the goal for a particular
passage of practice’’ (1995a, p. 19).
    This provides the link with his earlier and much discussed framework of
opportunities-in-context (1984), which was developed with the emphasis on
interests to the forefront and is now seen as covering the process of goal-
formation in science:

   I believe that one can see an underlying general structure to goal-formation
   in science, and that modelling and coherence are important concepts in
   unraveling that structure. But I do not think that one can offer causal
   explanations of goal-formation on this basis. To the contrary, there seems to
   be an ineradicable element of chance here. There is an explanatory gap that
   I cannot see how to bridge between possessing a given range of resources
   and assembling them into a coherent goal. (1990, p. 684)22

As an example, Pickering gives Zweig’s interpretation of the fundamental rep-
resentation of the SU(3) group as referring to quarks, rather than purely
mathematical entities, a move he claims cannot be understood or justiﬁed at all
in terms of the context and resources available at the time. All that we can say by
way of explanation is that ‘‘it just happened’’ (Pickering 1990, p. 721, fn. 16).
    Coming back to the decomposition of the modeling process into ‘‘free’’ and
‘‘forced’’ moves, the existence of the former is crucial to the conclusion that
the products of ‘‘practice’’ are to be viewed as the contingently successful end
points of the dialectics of resistance and accommodation. This aspect of
contingency is central, as throughout his work Pickering emphasizes the
element of discretion involved in these free moves and states that, with regard
to an example from mathematical practice, ‘‘Nothing prior to that practice
determined its course’’ (1995b, p. 442; our emphasis) and that ‘‘we can never
know ahead of practice what its products will be’’ (1995d, p. 415).23 It is
precisely these discretionary choices that reduce the openness inherent in the
modeling process, and thus ‘‘conceptual practice . . . has . . . the form of a dance
of agency in which the partners are alternately the classic human agent and
disciplinary agency’’ (Pickering 1995d, p. 420).
    We shall not delve any further into the ‘‘classic’’ notion of agency at work
here,24 except to recall that in chapter 4 we appealed to a broadly voluntarist


114   Science and Partial Truth
account of acceptance in order to help underpin the distinction between
‘‘factual’’ and ‘‘representational’’ beliefs. The issue that separates our view of
model construction and development from Pickering’s then concerns the role
that chance and unpredictability play in the latter and the concomitant re-
fusal to acknowledge the heuristic force of the structural elements of the
models themselves. This becomes clear when we look at the notion of
‘‘emergence,’’ which is fundamental to the ‘‘real-time’’ understanding of
science: The sense of emergence here is that of ‘‘brute chance’’ (1995a, p. 24),
of resistances and accommodations that emerge ‘‘unpredictably,’’ and of de-
velopments that ‘‘just happen.’’
    Such talk is heavily redolent of the ‘‘ﬂash of genius’’ view,25 and Pickering
acknowledges that it may be ‘‘offensive to some deeply ingrained patterns of
thought’’ (1995a, p. 24). It is precisely on this point that we ﬁnd this char-
acterization of the modeling process so problematic, in particular when it
comes to the claims that a ‘‘given model can be extended in an indeﬁnite
number of ways’’ and ‘‘nothing within the model itself foreshadows which
should be chosen.’’26 It is on the latter sort of claim, in particular, that we
wish to focus attention here.


   The Practice of Pursuit

Let us begin by considering the ‘‘pursuit’’ of models and theories. This has
been famously described by Laudan as the ‘‘nether region’’ between discovery
and justiﬁcation (Laudan 1980, p. 174). In the previous chapter, we argued
that the boundaries between these domains cannot be sharply drawn, not
because sociological considerations emerge on both sides of the line, but ra-
ther because the appropriate epistemic attitude is the same across them. As we
also remarked, with the positivist claim that all that is epistemically inter-
esting can be found in the domain of justiﬁcation only, the domain of ‘‘dis-
covery,’’ taken to cover both heuristics per se and pursuit, was left in a
methodological vacuum. Obviously, one way to ﬁll this vacuum is with as-
sorted interests and opportunities-in-context, and if the wall between domains
is toppled also, these pour over into justiﬁcation as well. But this is to dis-
regard the point that there is actually no vacuum to be ﬁlled, that the ‘‘do-
mains’’ of discovery and pursuit have a rich and interesting and primarily
epistemic structure that meshes smoothly with that of ‘‘justiﬁcation.’’ Thus
epistemically and structurally what we have is not an abrupt scission but
rather a continuous process of theory ‘‘development.’’
    As Post notes, there is an ambiguity in the phrase ‘‘the construction of
theories’’: ‘‘if there are any criteria of merit which we accept in judging the
structure of given theories, then these criteria may presumably be carried into
the ﬁeld of building new theories. The study of the structure of existing houses
may help us in constructing new houses’’ (1971, p. 217). The ‘‘structure’’ here
derives from that of the ‘‘heuristic objects’’-the theories and models them-
selves (Post 1971, pp. 216 and 218). Indeed, this can be taken as the central
motif of the rest of this chapter: The driving forces of theory development lie,


                                         Partiality, Pursuit, and Practice    115
not within some social nexus nor with the notion of ‘‘agency,’’ whether
human or ‘‘material,’’ but with the structures of the objects of this
development.27
    Of course, to say that heuristics is ‘‘structured’’ is not to say that it is
algorithmic, in the sense that there is a set of rules and all that needs to be
done is follow them in order to obtain a new theory.28 Post, for example, talks
of ‘‘a rationale, if not a ‘logic’ of scientiﬁc discovery’’ (1971, p. 216),29 where
this rationale will include the criteria for the a posteriori assessment of the-
ories as indicated previously, as well as further ‘‘heuristic’’ criteria that we
shall speak of later. These criteria constrain theory development and thus
delimit its inherent openness, effectively suspending this development between
the algorithmic and the totally free. Indeed, the sense of ‘‘openness’’ here
needs to be handled quite carefully. Of course, it is one of the major themes of
this book that scientiﬁc theories and models are only ‘‘partially’’ formed, in a
sense that can be technically deﬁned, but this does not mean that the space of
further development is wide open.
    Here the issue of creativity intrudes. There is a great deal of literature on
this subject, but we shall simply note that perhaps Reichenbach’s line of
epistemic relevance can be drawn through psychology. On one side we have
the private-and perhaps subconscious-circumstances that lead a scientist
to an idea,30 whereas on the other we have the connections between that
idea and the relevant embedding context, which connections can be rep-
resented in structuralist terms. The ﬁeld of creativity-of how it is that
scientists actually come up with their ideas-is concerned, at least in part,
with the former circumstances.31 We nevertheless feel compelled to empha-
size that these circumstances cannot be divorced from this context, and a
great deal of what is put down to ‘‘genius’’ and ‘‘creativity’’ can be under-
stood as the judicious perception and exploitation of a particular heuristic
situation.32 We think that an obvious case can be made for claiming that
these theoretic guidelines of theory construction and development also
function as reasons for theory choice in nonepistemic situations (or at least
situations that are not explicitly epistemic; certain of these reasons may in-
volve reference to other theories, suitably supported)-that is, as reasons for
conferring appropriate warrant in what has been called theory pursuit. Such
criteria, we recall, include the General Correspondence Principle, simplicity
(problematic, granted), and the retention of well-conﬁrmed universal in-
variance principles (Post 1971).
    A nice example of theory pursuit in a situation where explicitly empirical
factors had little or no role to play is that of the competition between the
paraparticle and color models of quarks in the mid-1960s. This episode is one
of the more important in the history of modern physics, as it resulted in the
birth of quantum chromodynamics (QCD), generally accepted as the best
theory of the strong nuclear forces currently available. It began with a statistics
problem: There was good reason to believe that quarks should be assigned spin
½, and, therefore, according to the spin-statistics theorem, should be regarded
as fermions, and their overall wave functions should be antisymmetric. On the
other hand, there were cases in which the most successful model was one in


116   Science and Partial Truth
which the wave function of the three quark-collective was symmetric under
interchange of any two quarks. As in the case of the liquid-drop and shell
models of the nucleus, discussed in chapter 3, what we have here are two
models that are inconsistent with one another. The problem, then, was to
overcome this inconsistency by reconciling the apparently fermionic nature of
quarks with symmetric wave functions.
    Greenberg proposed a particularly elegant solution to this problem that
was derived from his long-standing investigation of the possibility of particles
with mixed-symmetry wave functions (the relevant history of such possi-
bilities is given in French 1985): He suggested that quarks just were examples
of these theoretical possibilities, or paraparticles. Shortly afterwards, Han and
Nambu put forward an alternative solution to the problem, in which quarks
were given an extra degree of freedom by means of which they could have
spin ½ yet also possess symmetric wave functions under interchange of any
two. These extra degrees of freedom subsequently came to be denoted by
‘‘color.’’ The color model not only reconciled the symmetry characteristics of
quarks and their composites but also appeared to be observably equivalent to
its paraparticle rival. The rest, as they say, is history. The three-triplet model
with color went on to become the core of the theory of quantum chromo-
dynamics, while paraparticle theory languished; although some further the-
oretical work continues to be done, it is now generally regarded as being
outside the mainstream.
    Pickering has considered this episode from the perspective of his earlier
notion of opportunities-in-context, the central idea of which is that

   Each scientist has at his disposal a distinctive set of resources for con-
   structive research. These may be material-the experimenter, say, may
   have access to a particular piece of apparatus-or they may be intangible-
   expertise in particular branches of experiment or theory acquired in the
   course of a professional career, for example. The key to my analysis of the
   dynamics of research traditions will lie in the observation that these re-
   sources may be well or ill matched to particular contexts. Research stra-
   tegies, therefore, are structured in terms of the relative opportunities
   presented by different contexts for the constructive exploitation of the
   resources available to individual scientists. (1984, p. 11)

His conclusion is that the color model won the day because paraparticle
theory was simply too obscure, too complex, and too ‘‘out of the ordinary’’ for
most physicists (1984, pp. 94–95; private correspondence).33 We recall that
this idea of opportunities-in-context is now taken to cover only the goal-
formation phase of scientiﬁc practice. Thus, it leaves a gap between the
formation of goals and their achievement, and it is within this gap that ‘‘re-
sistance’’ emerges. And goal formation is inherently contingent, involving an
ineradicable element of chance.
    However, this analysis simply cannot bear the weight of historical cir-
cumstance (for further details, see French 1995). In fact, the idea of a gen-
eralized form of quantum statistics had been around for quite some time and
the details of the paraparticle model in particular had been in circulation for


                                         Partiality, Pursuit, and Practice    117
some months prior to the publication of Greenberg’s work. It is certainly
notable that the textbook on which generations of physicists cut their
quantum mechanical teeth-Dirac’s Principles of Quantum Mechanics-
speciﬁcally mentioned this possibility. Furthermore, at the heart of para-
statistics lies group theory, a fundamental part of quantum mechanics as
applied to high-energy physics and certainly well known to physicists at that
time.34 Thus there was little that was fundamentally new or unfamiliar
mathematically in paraparticle theory, and this was particularly true of later
‘‘cleaned up’’ versions. This disposes of the claim that the theory was ‘‘ob-
scure’’ or ‘‘unfamiliar’’ and was not pursued for that reason.
    Rather than turning to contextualized opportunities and the comparative
unfamiliarity of the paraparticle model to explain the scientiﬁc community’s
preference, we should focus on the objective characteristics of the models
themselves.35 In fact, the decisive factor was that the color model was able to
be ‘‘gauged,’’ whereas the paraparticle one was not.
    Classical electromagnetism is said to be ‘‘gauge invariant’’ in the sense that
the empirical consequences of the theory are unaffected by certain transfor-
mations, which vary from one space-time point to another, applied to the
potentials (whose derivatives express the electric and magnetic ﬁelds). In
quantum electrodynamics (QED)-generally acknowledged as one of the most
(empirically) successful theories in the history of physics-the electron and
photon ﬁelds can also be transformed in this manner, without changing the
physical predictions of the theory.36 Thus gauge invariance ‘‘inherited’’ the
immense empirical success of QED and came to be elevated to the status of a
fundamental principle. So we see that there was good reason to pursue a model
that could be shown to similarly incorporate this invariance principle, over
one that could not (pursuit being differential in this way).37 The point is made
by Greenberg himself, who also acknowledges the relative familiarity of the
color model:

   The SU(3) color theory became more popular than the parastatistics version
   because a) the former is more familiar and easy to use, and b) up to now
   nobody has been able to gauge the parastatistics theory, while the gauging
   of the SU(3) color theory gives quantum chromodynamics. Let me be ex-
   plicit, the two theories are equivalent quantum mechanically, but they are
   apparently not equivalent from the standpoint of quantum ﬁeld theory.
   (Greenberg, private correspondence)

We shall return shortly to a consideration of the precise nature of this simi-
larity between QED and QCD and, relatedly, that of the ‘‘objective char-
acteristics’’ of the models involved.38
    Before we do so, let us consider this issue of the relative familiarity of models a
little further. This concept is also a central feature of Giere’s account of scien-
tists’ choices regarding which model to pursue (1988). One case study he
presents is that of the decision to pursue Dirac (relativistic) models of the nu-
cleus rather than Schrödinger (nonrelativistic) ones (1988, pp. 216–218). As
the names suggest, members of the latter family are characterized by some form
of Schrödinger’s equation, with suitably approximate interaction potentials


118    Science and Partial Truth
obtained by ignoring or downplaying relativistic effects, whereas the former are
all based on the Dirac equation with relativistic effects included. Although
admitting that it was new experimental data that lead to a resurgence of interest
in the Dirac approach, Giere notes that not all the scientists involved were
convinced of the usefulness of such models as applied to medium-energy in-
teractions. At this point, Giere claims, nonepistemic considerations must come
into play, and he argues for the importance of ‘‘acquired cognitive resources’’ in
such situations, in particular those that refer to the scientists’ ‘‘familiarity’’ with
the model concerned.
    This familiarity with a particular conceptual element, such as a model, is
not to be regarded as abstract but rather in terms of a particular skill of
applying and extending the model to new situations. Experimentalists typi-
cally share many of the same cognitive resources with the theoreticians but,
in addition, possess a wide range of skills necessary for working with the
material elements of scientiﬁc practice. Giere gives a number of illuminating
examples, including the case of a young theorist who was originally put onto
the Dirac approach by his thesis advisor. After a couple of hiatuses, he decided
to return to his work on relativistic models on noticing the general excitement
they were generating at the time. According to Giere, what the theorist was
primarily concerned with was his short-term professional interest, and the
upshot is that ‘‘The question of whether the Dirac or the Schroedinger ap-
proach is correct seems to have played little role in these decisions’’ (1988,
p. 218).
    Now the issue, of course, is what is meant by ‘‘correctness’’ here. If truth,
in the correspondence sense, is meant, then, of course, we would be inclined
to agree that whether a model is true, in this sense, plays little if any role in
deciding which theory to pursue. However, even granted that a young re-
searcher, eager to publish and act in her best short-term professional interest,
might prefer to work with that model with which she was more familiar, the
question arises as to how this familiarity was obtained in the ﬁrst place. Giere
attributes the original impetus for working on these models to a combination
of the authority of the advisor and the student’s theoretical interests. How-
ever, one must go back even further and ask, What was it about that partic-
ular model that made it seem worth pursuing to the advisor and attractive to
the student, even before it gained any predictive success? The answer, we
suggest, lies with certain objective characteristics of the model, such as, in this
particular case, those that cause it to satisfy the requirement of Lorentz in-
variance. This is, of course, a fundamentally important requirement, em-
bedded as it is within Special Relativity, itself supported by a variety of
epistemic considerations. Indeed, we get a hint of this in the theorist’s re-
sponses as recorded by Giere (1988, p. 217), and he himself notes the crucial
importance of subsequent predictive success in maintaining interest in this
kind of model.39
    In response, it might be asked, Why, then, did anyone bother with the
nonrelativistic approach? Again, we would point to objective features of the
model: those that confer upon it a certain mathematical simplicity giving rise
to greater computational tractability.40 In this case, the model is regarded as


                                           Partiality, Pursuit, and Practice      119
an approximation, useful where relativistic processes are not extensively
involved in the interactions concerned. Giere himself emphasizes this aspect in
his example, and we have indicated how such approximations can be suitably
characterized within the partial structures approach. And, of course, given
the pragmatic value of such models, the greater computational complexity
associated with the alternative, and the justiﬁcation of the approximation
concerned in terms of what is understood to be going on in the domain under
consideration, their employment may be entirely rational.
   Nevertheless, as Giere himself notes, ‘‘No nuclear physicist seems to doubt
that, in principle, the correct model of the nucleus would be a relativistic
model based on the Dirac equation’’ (1988, p. 184). The reason for such lack
of doubt, of course, lies with the success (ultimately empirical) of Special
Relativity, and here we see a well-regarded invariance principle-such regard
being grounded, we stress again, in the empirical success of a particular
theory-being invoked to establish overarching criteria of ‘‘correctness’’ for
those models associated with another.
   It is, perhaps, one of the more noteworthy features of modern physics that
symmetry principles have come to play this heuristic role.41 Nonetheless,
invariance criteria are not infallible, as the case of parity conservation so
clearly indicates (Post 1971).42 The selection of which particular symmetry
principles are to serve as heuristic guidelines is not, of course, determined a
priori.43 As science progresses, certain of these principles are so elevated, and
ultimately experiment must play a crucial role in this rise to prominence,
although the exact nature of this role may not be clear and the inter-
connections between theory or model, symmetry principle, and experiment
may be tortuous and entangled. We learn what principles of invariance to
apply in theory development by noting which are well supported and in-
corporated into our most successful theories. And this importation proceeds
from one (local) domain of inquiry into another and essentially piggybacks on
the structural analogies between the two.
   The kind of analysis we have presented obviously drives against the so-
ciology of scientiﬁc knowledge, with its emphasis on social interests as fun-
damental and explanatory. It also militates against the sociology of scientiﬁc
practice, where, as we have noted, social interests also feature, although now
they are situated within the ‘‘plane of practice’’ rather than causally under-
lying it; in particular, these interests inform the aims and goals of science.
Although, as we have said, there is much in Pickering’s decomposition of the
modeling process that a more traditionally minded philosopher of science
would agree with, his concern with agency and ‘‘temporal emergence’’ and
the concomitant overlooking of heuristic factors lead him to see explanatory
lacunae that in fact can be bridged. Let us take another example where the
crucial development supposedly ‘‘just happened’’-namely, Zweig’s inter-
pretation of the representation of the SU(3) group as referring to quarks.
   An alternative understanding of this move can be achieved via Redhead’s
account of supplying a physical interpretation for surplus mathematical
structure within a theory (Redhead 1975). This is related to Post’s heuristic
guideline of ‘‘Adding to the Interpretation’’ (closely connected with ‘‘Taking


120   Science and Partial Truth
Models Seriously’’): ‘‘We take a hitherto incompletely interpreted part of the
abstract formalism of the theory, and give it a tentative interpretation of our
own, at some level’’ (Post 1971, p. 241). This interpretation, tentative as it is,
is still some way from being put forward in the state of unfettered freedom
that Pickering suggests-Zweig himself was not operating in a vacuum. In-
deed, Pickering’s own earlier work spells out just how detailed the context
actually was:

   The idea of reducing the number of elementary particles by explaining some
   of them as composite was by no means new. As early as 1949, C. N. Yang
   and Enrico Fermi had written a paper entitled ‘‘Are Mesons Elementary
   Particles?,’’ in which they speculated that the pion was a nucleon-anti-
   nucleon composite. When the strange particles began to be discovered, the
   Fermi-Yang approach was notably extended by the Japanese physicist S.
   Sakata in 1956. (1984, p. 86)

Suitably formulated in group-theoretic terms, the Sakata model became the
main rival to Gell-Mann’s Eightfold Way, until the 1964 discovery of the O
particle resolved the competition in the latter’s favor. As Pickering notes, re-
presenting the hadronic symmetries in group-theoretic terms ‘‘positively in-
vited’’ the view that hadrons were composite, and the best known and
developed position along these lines was the SU(3) tradition, whose funda-
mental representation-from which all others can be mathematically derived-
contained three members: ‘‘From there it was but a small step to the identiﬁ-
cation of the fundamental triplet representation of SU(3) with a triplet of
fundamental entities: the quarks’’ (Pickering 1984, p. 87).
    Zweig studied both the Sakata model and the reviews of SU(3) and, in-
dependently of Gell-Mann, came to the view that the observed multiplet ha-
dronic structure could be accounted for in terms of two or three hadronic
constituents. The next step was not only ‘‘simple and direct’’ but obvious: ‘‘As
one would expect for a neophyte in theoretical physics, he treated quarks as
physical constituents of hadrons and thus . . . derived all of the predictions of
SU(3) plus more besides’’ (Pickering 1984, p. 89). Thus scientiﬁc practice is
essentially different from that of some unfortunate rat in a maze, randomly
trying one possibility after another.44 And what makes it different are the
restrictions on this practice that are essentially ‘‘theoretic’’ in nature, in the
sense that they involve an ‘‘internal’’ analysis of the theory or model in
question.
    The point of these historical excursions is twofold: (1) that the space of
possibilities might be drastically more limited than the sociologists of scientiﬁc
practice seem to appreciate, once we accept that even apparently ‘‘free’’
moves in pursuit are structured by objective considerations and (2) that,
relatedly, it is the structure of the model itself that plays a crucial role in
‘‘foreshadowing’’ which is chosen. This is not to deny the ‘‘openness’’ of
theories to further development, of course: It is via partial structures that this
openness can be captured, and this also offers a suitable framework for con-
sidering the structural characteristics of models and thus for accommodating
the points touched on here.45


                                         Partiality, Pursuit, and Practice    121
   Partiality Makes Practice

There are two things to note immediately. The ﬁrst is simply that from the
perspective of partial structures the process of theory development can be seen
as one of deﬁning and redeﬁning the relationships between the appropriate set of
elements, be they genes, elementary particles, or whatever. In the initial stages,
some subset of the Ri will be laid down according to the sorts of heuristic criteria
previously suggested. Perhaps the most important concerns the Generalized
Correspondence Principle, which can be taken as expressing the idea that this
subset, or portions of it, will be bequeathed by the theory’s predecessor(s). Ad-
herence to well-conﬁrmed symmetry and invariance principles will then con-
strain this set of relations in further ways, as well as causing the element of
partiality and hence openness to be further reduced. In all cases, it is the ob-
jective qualities of the models that are important, as expressed in terms of their
relational structure. Hence, whereas logically the space of opportunity may be
inﬁnitely wide, in practice it is severely delimited in terms of heuristic structure.
    The second point to note is that in the practice of theory development these
criteria may be applied sequentially in a different order on different occasions,
with empirical considerations also added to the mixture.46 It is here again that
we see the distinction between the kind of reasons adduced under justiﬁcation
and those put forward as heuristic criteria begin to blur and crumble.47
    The introduction of partial structures thus allows a treatment of evolving
theories within the semantic approach, as Suppe has noted (1989, p. 427).
There is a problem of theory individuation here or, more speciﬁcally, whether
a change in a theory is regarded as a further development of that theory or as
leading to a different one, albeit related. In the case of the latter, we should not
properly talk of theories ‘‘evolving’’ but rather of a succession of descendants,
related in terms of some kind of Lakatosian ‘‘hard core’’ perhaps (Suppe 1989,
pp. 426–427). Alternatively, ‘‘if alterations in theories do not produce new
descendant theories, but rather theories are things that can grow, evolve, and
change without becoming a different theory, then this suggests that many
versions of the Semantic Conception are inadequate by virtue of improperly
individuating theories’’ (Suppe 1989, p. 428). Perhaps this problem of in-
dividuation can be circumvented by the partial structures approach as Suppe
suggests.48 Characterizing theories in this fashion allows for changes in the
family of relations Ri without thereby necessitating that we regard the
structure as referring to a different theory entirely.
    We have already indicated how the partial structures account gives a way
of treating, in fairly general terms, theories, models, and the diverse re-
lationships between them, embracing idealizations, approximations, iconic
models, and, of course, Kuhnian exemplars.49 Our concern, then, is with the
explicit representation of the structural relationships between the elements of
the domain under consideration. The various relationships that hold between
models (and, more generally, theories) represented in this way can be ana-
lyzed in terms of the relationships that hold between such families of relations.
And, of course, it is precisely the nature and characteristics of these re-
lationships that we are interested in from the point of view of theory pursuit.


122   Science and Partial Truth
    Thus, to return to our earlier historical example, the analogy between QED
and QCD, which both encouraged and permitted the expression of the latter in
gauge invariant form, can be expressed in terms of an appropriate relationship
of similarity holding between the respective Ri in the two cases.50 Leaving it at
that, of course, adds little to the discussion, either historically or philosophi-
cally, so let us elaborate a little further.
    Taking the former perspective ﬁrst,51 particles that interact via the strong
nuclear force can be grouped into multiplets of ‘‘isospin,’’ a spinlike vector
property. The isospin symmetry of the strong nuclear force can then be rep-
resented by the SU(2) group. Regarding the gauge invariance of QED from a
group theoretical perspective,52 Yang attempted to construct a similar theory
for the strong interactions that would be invariant under local gauge trans-
formations of SU(2). This attempt led to the famous Yang-Mills gauge theory
of the strong interactions, which, crucially, differed from its electrodynamic
analogue in containing nonlinear terms referring to the self-interaction of
particles ‘‘carrying’’ the strong force. Formally speaking, this difference de-
rives from the difference in group structure involved, which, in turn, can be
traced to the difference in the physical properties represented.
    Yang-Mills gauge theory came to be regarded as the exemplar for gauge
theories in general and was extended to apply to the electroweak interaction.
However, the negative analogy with QED turned out to be fundamental, as
Yang-Mills theory could not be shown to be renormalizable, a feature that
allows calculations to be made to arbitrarily high orders of approximation.53
As is well known, the crucial breakthrough came with the work of ’t Hooft
(Pickering 1984, pp. 173–180) and his invocation of spontaneous symmetry
breaking; the similarity with quantum electrodynamics was then restored.
With the problem of renormalizability resolved, theorists returned to the
possibility of constructing a gauge ﬁeld theory of the strong interactions, and
their interest focused on the SU(3) group of quark colors as the appropriate
gauge group. The result was QCD, and it is precisely at this point that interest
in the paraparticle model waned. What we have here is a complex web of
similarities and dissimilarities existing between models, which, indeed, were
constructed on the basis of the former, the ultimate ground for this in-
corporation of similarity, and also for the dissimilarities that arise, being
empirical (albeit appropriately mediated as we have said).
    Turning to the philosophical perspective, ‘‘similarity’’ can be decomposed
into partial isomorphisms holding between certain members of the families of
relations concerned (again see French and Ladyman 1999). The ‘‘degrees and
respects’’ characteristic of this notion can then be captured in terms of the
number and kinds of relations included in the relevant subsets. In the case of
QED and QCD, it is in terms of the correspondence between certain members
of the Ri, which refer to the relationships between the particles expressed by
the relevant Lagrangians, that we can say that the theories are similar with
respect to gauge invariance.54 The Ri may refer not only to ‘‘physical’’ re-
lationships in this manner but also to mathematical ones.55 Thus the fun-
damental role of group theory, both heuristically and formally, can be
accommodated within this approach: The group-theoretic similarities between


                                         Partiality, Pursuit, and Practice    123
U(1) and SU(2), say, establish the bridge between domains, heuristically, and
the partial isomorphism between models, formally.
    Likewise, Pickering’s notion of ‘‘association’’ can also be understood in
terms of such structural analogies. In the case of scientiﬁc practice, the ulti-
mate source of the analogy, partial as it is, lies in the properties of the particles
described by the theories, these properties, such as charge and isospin, being
introduced to accommodate experimental results. Where the analogy breaks
down, ‘‘accommodation’’ might be sought for in terms of changes in the
relevant family Ri. The move from a positive to a negative analogy in the face
of resistance gets expressed in a shift of the partial isomorphism across the Ri.
    The ‘‘resistance,’’ then, is manifested in the structures or, even more ex-
plicitly, in the characteristics of the Ri.56 Ultimately, its source is empirical.
Thus, the resistance represented by the occurrence of nonlinear terms in the
ﬁeld equations of Yang-Mills theory can also, of course, be expressed structu-
rally and, to repeat, derives ultimately from the properties of the interaction
particles, which, in turn, were introduced to accommodate the well-supported
‘‘phenomenological model’’-so called-of the strong force. The renormaliz-
ability problem was then overcome through the introduction of spontaneous
symmetry breaking-that is, through an accommodation expressed in terms of
changes in the Ri. New members of this family were introduced to overcome
the problem, thereby restoring the partial isomorphism between the relational
predicates in terms of which the renormalizability of QED and QCD is expressed.
    What we have, then, is the following sort of process in this case: On the
basis of some perception of structural correspondence between elements of
different domains, broadly and perhaps crudely understood (such as that
holding between the properties of sets of elementary particles, as in our ex-
ample), a family of (partial) relations, found to hold good in one domain,
typically well understood, is projected into another, about which knowledge is
even less complete or, rather, even more partial. Certain of these relations may
fail to hold in the new domain, as resistances arise. Others may come to be
established as accommodations are made. The correspondence, then, is with
only a subset of the original set, but nevertheless a (positive) analogy is es-
tablished. The initial bridge may then serve as the basis for further explora-
tion, as further relations are brought into the correspondence. The bridge itself
is an ‘‘open’’ structure, projecting into a domain about which knowledge is
only partial.57 What we have when we compare different models as to their
similarity is a time-slice of a heuristic process: The family of relations projected
into the new domain forms the basis of the partial isomorphism formally
holding between the relevant models. And the nature of this set-which re-
lations to project-is delineated by objective heuristic criteria.58


   Conclusion: Exemplars and Representational Belief

Let us return to the Kuhnian exemplars with which we began this discussion.
In chapter 5 of The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, as is very well known,
Kuhn grants these both pedagogic and epistemic priority over rules, in the


124   Science and Partial Truth
sense that although rules are abstracted from exemplars, exemplars can guide
research even in the absence of rules. How? By ‘‘direct inspection’’ (Kuhn
1970, p. 44). What does this mean? Kuhn’s answer is famous: He refers to
Wittgenstein’s ‘‘family resemblance’’ analysis of terms like ‘‘game’’ or
‘‘chair.’’ An activity is tagged with the word ‘‘game’’ not because it satisﬁes
some necessary and sufﬁcient set of criteria for what constitutes a game but
because it bears a close ‘‘family resemblance’’ to well-established activities
that have come to be called games. Likewise, the activities of normal science
‘‘may relate by resemblance and modelling to one or another part of the
scientiﬁc corpus which the community in question already recognises as
among its established achievements’’ (Kuhn 1970, pp. 45–46).
    Again, an obvious way of considering family resemblance is in terms of a
‘‘partial isomorphism’’ holding between members of the respective Ri. The
degree of closeness of the resemblance may then be crudely characterized
through both the kind and number of matching relations between the models.
This achieves an element of objectivity only by pushing the possibility of
subjective judgment one step back. The question arises again: On what
grounds are certain kinds of relations judged more important in establishing
resemblance than others? The question becomes particularly acute in the
context of the history previously outlined, where the resemblance between
QCD and the established achievement of QED is established through the
medium of group theory. One very obvious answer can be spelled out in terms
of broadly sociological conventions negotiated within the relevant scientiﬁc
community. (This might form part of the sociological response to the question
as to why gauge invariance is taken to be so important, for example.) The
equally obvious alternative brings us back to the nature and role of heuristic
guidelines: Those kinds of relations that hold between the elements of em-
pirically successful models will tend to be imposed on the elements of suc-
cessor models (interpreting the General Correspondence Principle in terms of
preserving structure) and will tend to be imported across domains in situa-
tions where analogies are being developed.
    At ﬁrst blush, it might seem misleading to introduce consideration of ex-
emplars in a nonsociological discussion of pursuit. The standard examples
(exemplars of exemplars?) include the pendulum and the weight on a spring,
and although these have a fundamental pedagogical role to play in introdu-
cing new recruits to the paradigm (according to Kuhn), it is hard to see what
role they might play in pursuit once professionalization has been achieved.
Surely a research worker in some area of interest-quantum ﬁeld theory,
say-does not resolve issues of pursuit by directly inspecting the simple
pendulum.
    But of course, exemplars are typically arranged in hierarchies of abstrac-
tion, leading the initiate from, say, the pendulum, to the simple harmonic
oscillator and beyond. Thus, a graduate textbook on quantum ﬁeld theory
might begin with the example of a vibrating string. Here again one might be
tempted to allow nonepistemic considerations to enter the picture: Those
exemplars at the higher levels of the hierarchy can be regarded as effectively
delineating the space of opportunities in such a way that only those models


                                       Partiality, Pursuit, and Practice   125
that are appropriately or sufﬁciently similar to these exemplars are pursued.
And the choice of exemplar to invoke has more to do with who one’s super-
visor is than with the standard epistemic virtues. There are two things to be
said here: One has been said before-namely, that this account can plausibly
be regarded as nonepistemic only on the surface. If we think a little about why
particular exemplars are given in the relevant textbooks or pressed upon the
hapless graduate student by the overbearing supervisor, it’s not difﬁcult to see
that epistemic considerations might have something to do with it. Why is the
example of the pendulum so ubiquitous? Because it is simple, it is computa-
tionally tractable, and it does seem to describe what happens in reality, given
certain constraints, more or less.
    The ‘‘ﬁt’’ is, of course, only approximate, and it is the characteristics of this
approximation that render the pendulum example simple and computation-
ally tractable-that render it, indeed, an exemplar. As we have indicated,
approximation can be accommodated within the semantic approach, and the
accommodation runs along the same lines as given in the discussion of
similarity: The relationship between the approximate model and that of the
data is one of an isomorphism holding between portions of the relevant
families of relations in each case. As the approximation is improved and the
model becomes less ideal, of course, the match between the relevant Ri
increases.
    Talk of unanalyzed resemblances between exemplars distracts attention
from the underlying dynamics of theory development. Resemblances are
considered to hold between items that are already established, as it were, but
in the context of pursuit and ‘‘guiding research,’’ the focus is on the process of
establishing resemblances itself. Kuhn’s picture of ‘‘normal science’’ at this
point appears to be a curiously static one: The question at the forefront is
‘‘what binds the scientist to a particular normal-scientiﬁc tradition?’’ (1970,
p. 44)-that is, what holds the paradigm (understood in the later sense of a
disciplinary matrix) together?-and it is in terms of this frozen tableau that
the priority of exemplars over rules and guidelines is established. (It is only
during crisis, when the binding loosens, that, according to Kuhn, a concern
with rules manifests itself.)
    However, this picture is not the whole picture! In Kuhn’s later ‘‘Post-
script,’’ he attempts to make clear what he is about: In explicating the role of
exemplars, Kuhn talks of embedded ‘‘tacit’’ knowledge (the term is attributed
to Polyani), which would be misconstrued if taken to be represented by rules
that are ﬁrst abstracted from exemplars and then taken to function in the
latter’s stead:


   Or, to put the same point differently, when I speak of acquiring from ex-
   emplars the ability to recognize a given situation as like some and unlike
   others that one has seen before, I am not suggesting a process that is not
   potentially fully explicable in terms of neuro-cerebral mechanism. Instead I
   am claiming that the explication will not, by its nature, answer the ques-
   tion, ‘‘Similar to what?’’ That question is a request for a rule, in this case for
   the criteria by which particular situations are grouped into similarity sets,


126   Science and Partial Truth
   and I am arguing that the temptation to seek criteria (or at least a full set)
   should be resisted in this case. (1970, p. 192)

   This seems to ﬁt the static picture delineated previously, with similarity
taken as primitive and exemplars accorded priority over rules. However, it
soon becomes apparent that here Kuhn is talking of the most basic level of
perception of similarity in terms of shared stimuli. Members of a group or
scientiﬁc community must see things and process stimuli in much the same
ways, else how are we to understand the group’s cohesion and communality?
And one of the fundamental techniques by which the members of the com-
munity achieve this cohesion and learn to see things in the same way is
through sharing examples of situations that other members of the group have
already learned to view as similar to certain others (Kuhn 1970, pp. 193–
194). Of course, Kuhn grants, this perception of similarity must be the result
of appropriate neural processing and hence governed by physical and chem-
ical laws. In this sense, he writes,

   once we have learned to do it, recognition of similarity must be as fully
   systematic as the beating of our hearts. But that very parallel suggests that
   recognition may also be involuntary, a process over which we have no
   control. If it is, then we may not properly conceive it as something we
   manage by applying rules and criteria. To speak of it in those terms implies
   that we have access to alternatives, that we might, for example, have dis-
   obeyed a rule, or misapplied a criterion, or experimented with some other
   way of seeing. Those, I take it, are just the sorts of things we cannot do.
   (Kuhn 1970, p. 194)

    Thus the priority of exemplars over rules is a consequence of this in-
voluntary perception of similarity, which just steals over us, as it were.59
Yet-and this is the crucial point-Kuhn does not leave it there; this rec-
ognition of similarity over which we have no control is not ubiquitous in the
sense of being applicable to all levels of exemplars. Immediately after the
quoted passage, Kuhn continues, ‘‘Or, more precisely, those are things we
cannot do until after we have had a sensation, perceived something. Then we
do often seek criteria and put them to use. Then we may engage in inter-
pretation, a deliberative process by which we choose among alternatives as
we do not in perception itself’’ (Kuhn 1970, p. 194). Once we move away
from the level of perception and begin to interpret, then we do have access to
alternatives, we do have choice, and we must invoke criteria.
    This difference is fundamentally important, and we shall now offer an in-
terpretation of it in terms of Sperber’s distinction between factual and rep-
resentational beliefs.60 We recall that the former are likewise generated
involuntarily, whereas the latter, which is where acceptance is epistemically
situated, are not. Our suggestion then is that it is at the level of factual belief that
the perception of similarity is involuntary, and it is here that exemplars have
priority over rules. We also recall that factual beliefs arise at the lowest level of
the hierarchy of models, at the level of the ‘‘data’’ in Bogen and Woodward’s
sense. It is here, if anywhere, that we have ‘‘direct representation,’’ and this


                                            Partiality, Pursuit, and Practice      127
provides the most basic structure of the relevant domain. And it is here, if
anywhere, that the perception of similarity between domains structured at this
lowest level is direct and involuntary-we just ‘‘see’’ it, in Kuhn’s terms. This
perception provides the fundamental bridge between the domains, on the back
of which associations can then be made and structural relationships from one
domain imported into another.
    Once these associations start to be established, we have already moved up
to representational belief, and at this level heuristic criteria, such as the
preservation of well-supported symmetry and invariance principles, may be
invoked as model construction gets under way. Here, as we said, there is an
element of choice, both as to which criterion to invoke and which model to
pursue and develop. At this level, exemplars lose their priority to rules, as they
must, since we are no longer concerned with the static situation of perceiving
similarity between minimally structured domains but rather with the dy-
namic situation of establishing similarities by importing structure.
    The sociologists’ fundamental error, then, is to assume that this priority
holds at all levels, not just across but ‘‘up’’ the board, as it were. They fail to
take note both of its basis in this involuntary perception of similarity and of
Kuhn’s acknowledgment of the intrusion of rules when it comes to what he
calls ‘‘interpretation.’’ Their error, ultimately, is to take all scientiﬁc belief as
factual, and it is from this that their whole Wittgensteinian slant, with its
rejection of rules and criteria, derives. With exemplars prioritized and family
resemblances (mistakenly) perceived even at the highest levels, rather than
established, the dynamic extension of the scientiﬁc ‘‘net’’ cannot be driven by
structural associations but by external, nonepistemic factors. In other words,
we are suggesting that the invocation of social interests is the result of the
failure to see beyond the static picture of interexemplar relations.
    Models do guide research but only insofar as they are heuristic objects in
Post’s sense. Direct inspection may indeed reveal that structure that is em-
pirically supported and that is to be preserved according to the Correspon-
dence Principle, but simply noting the existence of a ‘‘family resemblance’’
between models cannot in any way account for their development. Kuhn’s
apparent omission was inherited by the sociologists of scientiﬁc knowledge
who ﬁlled the gap with talk of ‘‘interests.’’ With the sociology of scientiﬁc
practice, we see a shift to a concern with the establishment of relations be-
tween models, to a concern with ‘‘bridging’’ and ‘‘accommodation,’’ but now
the openness of the ‘‘net’’ is taken too extensively, and the element of freedom
is pushed too forcefully. It is simply not the case that nothing within the model
itself foreshadows which line of development should be pursued.
    To conclude, then, exemplars might indeed be said to guide theory de-
velopment, but putting it down to what the student learned from some text or
advisor pressure is too glib. At some point, empirical factors intrude, even if it
is through layers of abstraction or simpliﬁcation. And, of course, iconic models
may also function as exemplars in this way. One of Post’s heuristic criteria
that we have already mentioned is that of ‘‘taking models seriously,’’ to which
we would add, yes, of course, but not just in terms of the elements A, rep-
resenting the entities concerned. The set of relations Ri should also be ‘‘taken


128   Science and Partial Truth
seriously,’’ and in the case of iconic models and exemplars in particular, the
structural characteristics expressed by these relations may have enormous
heuristic signiﬁcance. Indeed, it might perhaps be said that underlying all of
these considerations is the most fundamental heuristic guideline, which is also
the ﬁnal ‘‘message’’ of this chapter: Take the structure seriously.




                                       Partiality, Pursuit, and Practice   129
         7
         QUASI TRUTH AND THE
         NATURE OF INDUCTION

Having discussed the factors involved in the pursuit of scientiﬁc theories, we
now turn our attention to the issue of justiﬁcation. From the structural per-
spective, the higher level models come to be justiﬁed through their relation-
ships with other models in the hierarchy, descending to the data models at the
bottom. Tracking these justiﬁcatory routes through the hierarchy of partial
structures is precisely what the notion of partial isomorphism is supposed to
do. From the epistemic perspective, however, it is our beliefs that we talk of
being justiﬁed, and the issue now is whether the notion of quasi truth can
shed further light on this talk in the scientiﬁc context. We believe it can.
   Shifting to this epistemic, or ‘‘internal,’’ perspective, we begin by noting
that inferences, or ‘‘reasonings’’ in general, are linguistically expressed by
arguments. Any argument is composed of a set of premises and a conclusion.
An argument is valid if the conclusion cannot be false when the premises are
true; otherwise, it is said to be invalid. Valid arguments are the object of study
in deductive logic, of course. However, in both everyday life and, critically,
science, we often make inferences that are considered to be reasonable but
that are invalid. Such inferences and the corresponding arguments are called
inductive (or inductions in general). We are going to take this idea of in-
duction in a very broad sense as covering all kinds of nondemonstrative
inferences. The logic of such inferences is, of course, inductive logic.
   The nature and role of inductive logic in scientiﬁc reasoning has, of course,
been the subject of enormous discussion. Following the decline of logical
empiricism and the program of inductive logic associated with it-and in
particular the failure of Carnap to extend his form of inductive logic beyond
the conﬁnes of certain artiﬁcial languages-many philosophers of science
have concluded that the idea of such a logic is some kind of ‘‘philosophers’
invention,’’ a ‘‘make-believe’’ theory that has mired scientiﬁc methodology in
a morass of philosophical difﬁculties (see van Fraassen 1985a, pp. 258–281


                                       130
and 294–296, for example). However, we believe that such conclusions are
based on either a conception of induction which is too restrictive, or on
arguments that are simply unacceptable (see, for example, Salmon 1978, pp.
10–12). Our bold claim is that in everyday life, science, and technology, we
use certain inductive techniques to make predictions and forecast future ex-
perience, among other things. Induction therefore imposes itself upon us as a
signiﬁcant actuality, and some form of inductive logic should be developed to
investigate and systematize it. The form we have in mind, of course, in-
corporates the notion of quasi truth at the heart of the program.



    Forms of Inductive Argument

Among the various forms of induction, we can distinguish the following (this
list is by no means intended to be exhaustive):
     1. Induction by simple enumeration
     2. Induction based on Mill’s canons (elimination)
     3. Analogy
     4. Direct inference (from the frequency of an attribute in the parent
        population to the frequency of the same attribute in a sample of
        that population (cf. Carnap 1963)
     5. Indirect inference (from sample to population (cf. Carnap 1963)
     6. Predictive inference (from sample to sample (cf. Carnap 1963)
     7. The strict hypothetico-deductive method
     8. The generalized hypothetico-deductive method
     9. The statistical syllogism
    10. The argument from authority
    11. Inference from perception
    12. Inference from memory
    13. Testimony
    14. Statistical inference in general
    An argument may be conveniently and generally expressed as follows:


1 ; 2 ; . . . ; n
        

where 1, 2, . . . , n are the premises and  is the conclusion. When 1, 2, . . . ,
n !  is logically true, the argument is valid; otherwise, it is invalid.
    We know that a valid argument is unconditionally valid, in the sense that
its validity depends only on the meanings of its premises and conclusion, other
circumstances being irrelevant. On the other hand, an inductive inference is
made in the presence of a set of pertinent conditions, which confer more or
less plausibility upon it. Equivalently, we can say that the plausibility of an
induction-that is, the plausibility of the conclusion, as supported by the
premises-is also a function of certain extra conditions, which we call ‘‘side
conditions.’’ Thus the logical treatment of a form of induction reduces to the


                                 Quasi Truth and the Nature of Induction          131
inventory and analysis of its pertinent side conditions, which, when added to
the premises, contribute to the likelihood of the conclusion.
   Hence, there are two basic differences between deduction and induction:
Deduction is truth-preserving, while induction is not and deduction does not
depend on side conditions, while the latter are essential to induction. There is
a further distinction we would like to press; namely, to approximate to our
inductive reasonings in even a rough and qualitative manner, it is conven-
ient to consider as the aim of such reasonings, quasi or pragmatic truth,
rather than truth tout court, as it were. In other words, induction arrives
at ‘‘the truth,’’ in the correspondence sense, only indirectly or in special
cases.
   Clearly, then, in the case of inductive inferences, we must modify our
argument scheme to accommodate the set of side conditions G. G consists of
the propositions expressing the pertinent system of knowledge, as well as
those speciﬁc bits of evidence that contribute to the plausibility of the in-
ference. As the standard texts of logic and statistics make clear, the set G is of
the utmost importance: If, for example, we are dealing with indirect inference,
the sample examined must be random, reasonably large, and sufﬁciently
representative of the parent population, and all relevant facts relative to it
must be critically assessed. Consequently, an induction may be appropriately
represented by the following schema:
1 ; 2 ; . . . ; n
                       
        
Of course, the distinction between premises and side conditions may some-
times appear somewhat arbitrary. This point notwithstanding, the distinction
can be drawn in most cases and is absolutely essential for the development of
inductive logic.
    It is convenient to classify inductions into two groups: (1) those inductions
that do not employ statistical techniques either directly or indirectly, explicitly
or implicitly; thus their premises, side conditions, and conclusions cannot
involve probabilistic concepts, such as, those of degree of belief, limits of
frequencies, or probabilistic propensities, and (2) statistical inferences, strictly
speaking, or those inductions that are not included in the ﬁrst group. Simple
induction and analogy constitute examples of the ﬁrst group, whereas pre-
dictive inference, direct inference, and, in general, statistical inference belong
to the second. Although probabilistic notions are not intrinsically involved in
those inductions that belong to the ﬁrst group, we can utilize a particular
category of probability to evaluate them, as we shall see later.
    We shall therefore divide inductive logic into two disciplines: (1) simple
inductive logic, devoted to the study of inductions of the ﬁrst category, and (2)
statistical inductive logic, in which we treat inductions of the second kind. The
latter will not be considered from a formal point of view here,1 although we
have discussed elsewhere the problematic nature of such inferences as they
feature in ‘‘everyday’’ reasoning (da Costa and French 1993b). For the rest of
this chapter, when we talk of ‘‘inductive logic,’’ we shall mean simple in-
ductive logic only.


132      Science and Partial Truth
   The Generalized Hypothetico-Deductive Method

In what we shall call the ‘‘generalized hypothetico-deductive method,’’ we
have that certain propositions (the premises or bits of evidence) make plausible,
in the light of the side conditions, a new proposition, the conclusion, or hy-
pothesis. In certain cases, such as occur with certain statistical inferences, the
plausibility under consideration may even be commonly estimated by a
probability assignment. When the conjunction of the premises is logically
implied by the hypothesis and the side conditions, we have the particular
instance of the strict hypothetico-deductive method.
   The generalized hypothetico-deductive method may be envisaged as, in a
certain sense, the basic form of inductive inference: Any induction whatsoever
can be viewed as an application of this method. It sufﬁces, for this reduction, to
regard the conclusion of the initial induction as a hypothesis made plausible
by the premises plus the side conditions. Thus, the reformulation of an in-
duction as a case of the hypothetico-deductive method does not constitute a
profound logical or philosophical result but simply reﬂects the question of
emphasis in the appraisal of the original induction. Since inductions are not
truth-preserving, it is clear that we are unable to guarantee, with absolute
certainty, the truth of their conclusions-even when the corresponding
premises are known to be true. Hence, we may suppose that the principal aim
of any induction is normally to achieve some tentative statement, something
that is evident from the practice of science itself. This characteristic of in-
duction supports the suggestion that it is natural to regard all inductions as
applications of the method in question. Such a reduction, although logically
possible, in fact twists the psychological intention of the ﬁrst induction, but it
also opens up the possibility of systematically employing the probability cal-
culus, either in a qualitative or quantitative form, in order to evaluate in-
ductive inferences in general.


   Pragmatic Probability

Let us begin by considering subjective probability.2 This comes in two forms:
qualitative and quantitative, both of which are relevant for our purposes (cf.
Koopman 1940; de Finetti 1970; da Costa 1986). However, to keep things
comparatively simple, we shall limit our discussion to the quantitative form
only.
   The subjective probability attributed by a person S to a proposition  is
usually deﬁned as the rational degree of belief that S has in the truth of . It is
measured by a bet coefﬁcient, as is well known. In order that bet coefﬁcients
have an immediate sense, the propositions to which a probability is assigned
must be decidable; that is, we have to be able to settle, at least in principle,
who, among the persons placing the bets, is the winner. Starting from de-
cidable propositions, the subjectivist probability calculus can be developed in a
straightforward manner (see de Finnetti 1970; Lindley 1965). However,
when we try to apply the probability calculus to scientiﬁc theories, for


                               Quasi Truth and the Nature of Induction        133
example, certain difﬁculties are encountered. For instance, the only reason-
able degree of belief in the (correspondence) truth of a universal law is zero,
since their scope covers a potentially inﬁnite set of objects. (We shall return to
this issue shortly.) Furthermore, even if such a theory were to be regarded as
nothing more than a set of propositions or, from the ‘‘intrinsic’’ perspective,
were to be so regarded, it could not be considered decidable; its truth, or even
its falsehood, cannot be deﬁnitively settled. In contrast, we are completely
sure that a good and well-tested theory, given certain conditions, remains
pragmatically true forever, as we have discussed in chapter 4. Given this, it
seems to us that it is better to utilize degrees of belief not in the truth per se of
theories but in their pragmatic or quasi truth. In other words, we believe one
should consider, in this context, the employment of a form of ‘‘pragmatic’’
probability (da Costa 1986). This seems particularly natural in the case of
induction.
    The signiﬁcance of the reduction of all inductions to the hypothetico-
deductive method thus derives from the fact that it allows us to probabilize, in
a uniform manner, all inductions. Of course, it is still the case that there is no
a priori evaluation of inductive inference as there is of deductive reasoning.
The reliability of an induction depends on the plausibility conferred by the set
of premises on the conclusion, in the presence of the underlying conditions.
This kind of plausibility can only be estimated, we repeat, in an appropriate
way, by means of pragmatic probabilities, whether qualitative or quantitative.
Logical or frequency notions do not work in this context. With regard to the
former, no one has yet been able to formulate a reasonable system of logical
probabilities capable of coping with complex inductions. As for frequency
notions, the application of these to induction by simple enumeration and
analogy is problematic. More fundamentally, perhaps, the use of frequencies
presupposes the acceptance of certain theoretical constructions and hence
already presupposes some form of inductive logic in our sense.3 What we will
really be concerned with, then, is not the truth of the conclusion, given the
truth of the premises and underlying conditions, but instead its quasi truth,
assuming the quasi truth of the premises and underlying conditions. For the
effects of probabilization, the inductive procedure does not seek immediately
for truth but only, in the ﬁrst place, for pragmatic or quasi truth. However,
when quasi truth reduces to (correspondence) truth, as in the case of ob-
servation reports (see our discussion in chapter 3), our interpretation of the
probability calculus coincides with the standard one.
    Our previous list of inductions evidently shows that the analysis of an
individual induction has to be undertaken in a concrete fashion, taking ac-
count of all its signiﬁcant peculiarities. Thus our probabilistic treatment of an
induction has to be local: We are unable to weigh all extant pieces of evidence
and side conditions, except those known to be pertinent. Our treatment is also
instrumental, in the sense that induction may be regarded as simply a device
for arriving at quasi truth, and it is from this perspective that it should be
judged. Finally, the acceptance of an inductive conclusion is in principle only
provisional, in the sense that we have delineated in chapter 4.



134   Science and Partial Truth
   From this intrinsic perspective, one of the fundamental concepts of the
pragmatic probability calculus is that of a pragmatic proposition. A prag-
matic proposition  is a statement that asserts that another proposition b is
quasi-true, in a simple pragmatic structure A, in a domain D. Normally we
say only that  is quasi-true or pragmatically true, leaving A and the
domain that it models implicit. For some propositions, such as those that are
decidable,  is pragmatically true if, and only if, it is true. If  is a pragmatic
proposition afﬁrming that b is pragmatically true, then the pragmatic
probability of b is the standard degree of rational belief in . By the in-
troduction of an appropriate time parameter, we can transform a pragmatic
proposition , asserting that b is quasi-true, and that is not decidable, into a
decidable proposition 0 . In effect, it sufﬁces to take 0 as the proposition
that says, essentially, that b is quasi-true during some time interval. By
means of this device, we can attribute pragmatic probabilities even to
nondecidable propositions; when the time interval is large enough, we can
identify  and 0 . Of course, we acknowledge that this strategy involves an
idealization, but it does seem to be in accord with the pragmatist (particu-
larly Peircean) origins of our program. It is by means of this device that we
may confer nonzero prior probabilities upon scientiﬁc hypotheses. The un-
derlying idea is that a good scientiﬁc hypothesis or theory that is pragma-
tically or quasi-true in A is in a sense ‘‘absolutely’’ pragmatically or quasi-
true, when  is well chosen. Thus, for example, classical mechanics, Bohr’s
theory of the atom, and Maxwell’s electrodynamics are all quasi-true within
the sorts of limitations we have already discussed and will remain so for the
time being. Hence, we are allowed to attribute to them the pragmatic
probability 1.
   When we are attributing pragmatic probabilities to certain propositions
b1, b2, . . . , bn, it is natural to deal with the corresponding pragmatic prop-
ositions 1, 2, . . . , n and then close the set {1, 2, . . . , n} by the op-
erations deﬁned by the usual group of connectives. The propositions thus
obtained constitute a Boolean algebra, and in this manner the pragmatic
probability calculus can be embedded in the ordinary subjective probability
calculus (for further details, see da Costa 1986b; what we get is a ﬁnite-
additive measure in a Boolean algebra, in conformity with the subjectivist
approach).4


   Inductive Logic

On the basis of these foundations, we are now able to construct our system of
inductive logic (see da Costa 1987b). We have argued here that to probabilize
induction is, in a certain important sense, to probabilize the general
hypothetico-deductive method and that what we are essentially concerned
with in such a procedure are pragmatic probabilities. Indeed, given what we
have noted before, it seems to us that this is the only secure probabilistic basis
for a system of this type.



                               Quasi Truth and the Nature of Induction        135
   We begin by noting that, given what we have just said, the inductive
argument
1 ; 2 ; . . . ; n
                       
        
means that from the quasi truth of 1, 2, . . . , n and of the underlying
conditions G, we infer the quasi truth of . Thus the plausibility of inductive
inferences is judged with respect to the quasi truth of the statements con-
cerned. Furthermore, to make the application of the hypothetico-deductive
method more reliable, overall, several hypotheses should initially be for-
mulated and compared.5 Thus, in certain cases, for example, we compare a
particular hypothesis with a range of alternatives, including the negation of
the statement expressing the quasi truth of the hypothesis.
   The primary instrument of such comparative procedures is, of course,
Bayes’s Theorem. This has been the subject of extensive discussions in the
philosophy of science (Rosenkrantz 1977; Earman 1992), and Bayesians claim
that it provides an effective mechanism for describing changes in probability
attributions. Indeed, it might be said that the essence of the hypothetico-
deductive method in general lies in exactly such transformations from prior to
posterior probabilities (cf. Shimony 1970, p. 85). We shall apply the theorem
to pragmatic probabilities and suggest how a focus on quasi truth will allow us
to deﬂect certain objections that have been raised against it.


    Bayes’s Principle

Bayes’s Theorem serves as a basis for the following rule, which can be called
Bayes’s Principle: Let 1, 2, . . . , n be pragmatic propositions whose truth is
involved in an investigation connected with a pragmatic structure M, which
systematizes a determined domain of knowledge D, and let us further suppose
that every i, 1  i  n, has a prior probability different from zero (if i asserts
that bi is pragmatically true in M, then b1, b2, . . . , bn are the pertinent
hypotheses that save the appearances). Then, given a new piece of evidence 
that is also a pragmatic proposition, we should (temporarily) accept the i,
1  i  n, whose posterior probability is the highest. In many cases, we have
simply n ¼ 2, with 2 being 1.
   Two important considerations should be noted at this point. The ﬁrst is
that, as well as the conditional probability of the evidence relative to each
hypothesis, we also obviously have to be able to estimate the prior prob-
abilities of the hypotheses being compared, and this estimation does not take
place in vacuo, as it were. That is, the prior probabilities are not evaluated in the
absence of any background knowledge. On the contrary, their computation is
normally made relative to a given set of side conditions. Thus, ‘‘absolute’’
prior probabilities, assigned without regard to any previous body of knowl-
edge, are not given any signiﬁcant role in our system.6
   Second, our pragmatic probability measures are not deﬁned over universal
languages or even very powerful ones. Rather, they are introduced in restricted


136      Science and Partial Truth
languages that are still sufﬁciently rich to ensure the application of Bayes’s
Theorem (cf. Garber 1983). This will become apparent when we consider the
problem of logical omniscience later.
   It should also be emphasized that the usual conﬁrmation theorems can easily
be interpreted in pragmatic probability terms. These results then show how the
use of the probability calculus, under this interpretation, renders our choices
between competing hypotheses both more rational and more ‘‘organic.’’7



   Simple Induction and Analogy

By way of example, let us consider how simple induction and analogy can be
reduced to the general hypothetico-deductive method.
   Induction by simple enumeration proceeds as follows: From the premises
that some xi, 1  i  k, which belongs to the class A, also belongs to the class B,
we induce the conclusion that Vx(x 2 A ! x 2 B). Of course, such inferences
are also based on a certain set G of side conditions, which may include such
information as ‘‘no x is known that is a member of A, but not of B’’ or ‘‘the
connection between A and B does not appear to be purely accidental.’’
   Simple induction may then be symbolized by the schema:

x1 2 A ! x1 2 B; x2 2 A ! x2 2 B; . . . ; xn 2 A ! xn 2 B
                                                               
                 8xðx 2 A ! x 2 BÞ
where, to make things easier, we may admit that the sentence xi ! A belongs
to G, for all i ¼ 1, 2, . . . , n. In this schema, the premises are logical con-
sequences of the conclusion, and thus an induction by simple enumeration
may be logically converted into an instance of the strict hypothetico-deductive
method.
   We have already considered analogy from the ‘‘external’’ perspective in
chapter 3. In its simplest form, it consists in inferences of the following kind:
   The object x, which belongs to the class A, also belongs to the class B.
   The object y belongs to A.
   Therefore, y belongs to B.
Again, such reasoning is normally accompanied by a certain set of underlying
conditions S, containing plausible reasons to support the inference. We can
therefore convert analogy into the following inferential form:

y2A
           0
y2B
where S0 is S plus the statement that the object x, which belongs to A, also
belongs to B0 . In this manner, analogy may also be reduced to the generalized
hypothetico-deductive method.
   To probabilize these two forms of inductive inference, so as to be able to
apply Bayes’s Theorem and so forth, certain pragmatic probabilities must be
evaluated. With regard to analogy, for example, we have to evaluate the


                               Quasi Truth and the Nature of Induction        137
probability that y 2 B, given that y 2 A and the statements of S0 . It should be
noted, however, that normally the probabilities involved are only roughly
calculated; that is, we often proceed qualitatively. This leads us to recall the
point made in the previous section, that in many cases qualitative, rather
than quantitative, probabilities are all that are needed. The required theorems
can then be obtained on the basis of a suitable axiomatization of this notion,
such as is given in Koopman (1940).
   Let us conclude this section by noting, ﬁrst of all, that not all changes in
our probability measures proceed according to Bayesian conditionalization,
an aspect that can be regarded as a consequence of their local character. We
shall return to this point shortly (see also da Costa 1986b). Second, we rec-
ognize that inductive logic as a whole is somewhat richer than the system
outlined here; it includes, for example, the entire theory of elimination,
in particular, Mill’s methods (cf. von Wright 1951). However, we believe
that our account constitutes a useful ﬁrst step toward a more inclusive
characterization.


   Characteristics of Our System

We begin by recapitulating the essential characteristics of our system of in-
ductive logic: It is tentative, local, and instrumental, three characteristics it
shares with Shimony’s ‘‘tempered personalist’’ view (Shimony 1970).
    It is because the principal objective of any induction is to achieve some
kind of tentative judgment, expressed in the form of a hypothesis, that in-
duction as a whole can be visualized as an application of the hypothetico-
deductive method and probabilized in terms of the subjective probability
calculus. Furthermore, this tentative nature of our inductive inferences is
expressed in the claim that such inferences do not aim for the truth, as such,
but for ‘‘pragmatic’’ or ‘‘quasi’’ truth. This aspect is then reﬂected in our
attitudes toward the acceptance of theories.
    Our treatment is also local, in the sense that the analysis of an individual
induction must be made in concrete terms, trying to take account of its
relevant peculiarities. In other words, the application of pragmatic prob-
abilities is circumscribed by the relevant conditions of a particular in-
vestigation, and, in particular, such conditions change when the set of
hypotheses under consideration changes, leading to a related change in the
assignment of our a priori probabilities.
    Finally, our position is essentially instrumental, in the sense that induction
is regarded merely as a device for achieving quasi truth and must be evaluated
from this perspective. In particular, other alternative systems may also be
constructed, with the choice among these various possibilities being dictated
by pragmatic as well as logical considerations.
    We have reasserted these characteristics because it is through them that
our system can overcome the more serious objections usually leveled against
the idea of inductive logic in general.



138   Science and Partial Truth
   The Problem of Universal Laws

The ﬁrst objection we shall consider relates to the problem of universal laws
(see, for example, Nagel 1963 or, for a more general account, Gillies 1987).
The problem is more or less the following: What probability should we assign
to universal laws that have the form (Vx)Qx, where the quantiﬁer ranges over
a potentially inﬁnite set of objects? As is well known, Popper argued that the
prior probability of such a law is always zero, giving a degree of conﬁrmation
also equal to zero on a probability-based conﬁrmation theory (Popper 1972,
appendix 8). Given the ubiquity of such laws in science and their positive
conﬁrmation, this presents a serious difﬁculty for any inductivist account.
   One response to this objection is to accept that the a priori probability of a
universal law is zero but assert that, pragmatically speaking, science proceeds
directly from particulars to particulars without the mediation of such laws
(Carnap 1963, section 10; Hesse 1974). Thus, according to this view, what is
conﬁrmed in science are not universal laws but their particular instances, with
the laws possessing merely a heuristic value in terms of discovering predic-
tions. Unfortunately this approach cannot account for the use in physics, for
example, of complex, high-level theories-containing various explicitly theo-
retical terms-to make predictions. As Putnam has noted, there do exist ex-
amples in the history of science where there is no direct inductive evidence for
a particular prediction r but where the evidence in conjunction with a certain
group of relevant theoretical propositions gives r (Putnam 1975a, chapter 17).
   The challenge, therefore, is to show how putative universal laws may be
accommodated within a particular system of inductive logic without elim-
inating theories as a crucial part of the inductive process. That this challenge
can be met by our system is obvious if we consider the view of truth that is
employed in most accounts of the problem. The usual, if implicit, assumption
as regards the (complete) truth of the laws concerned is clearly revealed by
Gillies’s reformulation of the problem in subjectivist terms (Popper having
established his conclusion on the basis of the logical interpretation of prob-
ability): ‘‘Take, for example, I ¼ All Ravens are Black, and suppose A is forced
to bet on whether I is true. A can never win the bet, since it can never be
established with certainty that all ravens are black. However, A might lose the
bet if a non-black raven happens to be observed. Thus the only reasonable
betting quotient is q(I) ¼ 0, which indeed can be considered a kind of refusal to
bet’’ (Gillies 1987, pp. 24–25). The crucial point is that A is forced to bet on
whether the hypothesis is true. However, Gillies’s conclusion does not follow if
scientiﬁc propositions are regarded as quasi-true only, with our belief in such
a proposition treated not as a belief in its truth but in its quasi truth and
evaluated via the pragmatic probability calculus. It is then clear that nonzero
a priori probabilities can be assigned to supposedly universal hypotheses (da
Costa 1986b, p. 147). In this example, A would then be forced to bet on the
quasi truth of ‘‘All ravens are black,’’ which, of course, allows her to take
account of any uncertainty involved, and the betting quotient would not then
necessarily be zero.



                              Quasi Truth and the Nature of Induction        139
   But now the question arises: What exactly is meant by ‘‘uncertainty’’ in
this context? That is, how do we explicate the quasi truth of universal hy-
potheses of the type ‘‘All ravens are black’’? One possible answer is to say that
such hypotheses are regarded as if they were true at, or up to, a certain time
only, the uncertainty involved being expressed through the possibility of po-
tentially refuting instances being discovered at some future time. Thus our
subject A bets on ‘‘All ravens are black’’ being quasi-true in the sense that he
or she accepts the hypothesis as if it were true within the domain of knowledge
that is accessible (and here the background conditions play an important role)
and up to the time of the bet, and is then betting on it continuing to be as if it
were true in the future, up to some time to be speciﬁed. In other words, a
temporal element is introduced into the pragmatic structures in this case. We
shall consider this modiﬁcation in more detail later.
   This ‘‘temporal element’’ is obviously connected to extensions of the do-
main in question, in the sense that any refuting instances will arise through
such extensions. On this point, the ‘‘intrinsic’’ and ‘‘extrinsic’’ perspectives
again come together. Let us be clear: We are not saying that universal the-
ories can be eliminated in the Carnap-Hesse manner, with probabilities being
assigned to particular instances only. Rather, we are insisting that such
theories should not be regarded as ‘‘universally’’-in the sense of absolutely-
true and that our degrees of belief should be taken to apply to partially true
propositions. We recall Dorling’s words: ‘‘What is important is not how phi-
losophers construe physicists’ theories but how physicists construe them’’
(Dorling 1972, p. 183). But it is philosophers and not physicists or, more
generally, scientists themselves who assert the ‘‘literal’’-that is, absolute and
universal truth of laws and the theories that contain them.
   Furthermore, by not eliminating such theories from the inductive process,
our system allows us to retain them in establishing the plausibility of a pre-
diction r on the basis of the evidence e. It is therefore entirely capable of meeting
Putnam’s challenge: What we are concerned with is the degree of belief in the
quasi truth of r, given the empirical premise e and a certain set of underlying
theories included in G, which are themselves only quasi-true as well.


   The Problem of Prior Probabilities

This question of the a priori probability of universal laws is just a special case
of the problem of the assignment of prior probabilities in general: Since these
probabilities are essentially undetermined within the subjectivist theory itself
(see, for example, Howson 1985, pp. 305–309), there arises the possibility of
different (ideal) subjects making radically different assignments for the same
initial hypothesis.
    One possible response to this problem has been set out by Shimony, and we
can adopt it here (Shimony 1970, pp. 102–103). We begin by recalling the
requirement that various hypotheses concerning the subject matter under
consideration should be formulated in order to increase the reliability of our



140   Science and Partial Truth
method. In other words, we begin with not one but a set of hypotheses, and
the limits on this set depend on the context of the investigation (Shimony
1970, pp. 110–114) and general heuristic principles of the sort delineated by
Post, for example. If we then allow that some a priori probability can be
assigned to the hypotheses-and our discussion here suggests that it always
can, even in the case of universal hypotheses-and, signiﬁcantly, that one
and only one of the set of hypotheses is signiﬁcantly more quasi-true than the
alternatives, so that the likelihood p(e/h) of a piece of evidence upon this
hypothesis is much greater than for the others, then any difference in a priori
probabilities will be effectively ‘‘swamped,’’ as far as a consideration of
the posteriori probabilities is concerned (Shimony 1970, pp. 102–103). In
other words, given that we are typically concerned with the formulation
and comparison of various hypotheses and not just one, it can be shown
that differences in a priori probabilities become insigniﬁcant in the applica-
tion of the probabilistic approach, and (social) consensus may then be
achieved.8
   These considerations imply that a nonnegligible prior probability must be
given to any new hypothesis that happens to be suggested during the in-
vestigation. This will lead to a redistribution of the probabilities already as-
signed and thus to a possible violation of the probability axioms (Shimony
1970, p. 104). However, the pragmatic probability interpretation, like the
tempered personalist view, is local, in the sense given previously. Thus, when
the set of alternatives is augmented in this way, the conditions of the in-
vestigation are changed, and our prior probabilities must be reevaluated. It is
important to note for what follows that the use of the probability calculus to
infer the prior probabilities associated with the new conditions from those
associated with the old can lead to some bizarre results.


   The ‘‘Hacking Problem’’

This again is a special case of a general problem, referred to by Gillies as ‘‘the
Hacking problem’’ (Gillies 1987, pp. 19–23), and the point just made provides
an answer to this also.
    The nature of the problem can be made clear in the following way: At some
time t, before evidence e has been collected, our subject S assigns betting
quotients qt(h) and qt(h/e) to h and h given e, respectively. At time t0 , where
t0 > t, e is known to be the case, and this is the only extra information S has
acquired since t. S now assigns a quotient of qt(h) to h. Then our subject has
changed her belief according to Bayesian conditionalization, provided she
sets
qt0 ðhÞ ¼ qt ðh=eÞ
Hacking terms this the ‘‘dynamic assumption’’ and argues that the frame-
work of the Bayesian view does not compel S to satisfy it (Hacking 1967, pp.
313–316).



                               Quasi Truth and the Nature of Induction        141
   That this assumption might indeed be implausible is claimed by Gillies on
the basis of the following example:
   If [S] is asked to bet on some random process [p], it would be quite rea-
   sonable to assume at ﬁrst that [p] consists of independent events, and to
   calculate his or her betting quotients accordingly. This amounts, within the
   subjective theory, to making the assumption of exchangeability, that is, the
   assumption that the order of the events is of no signiﬁcance. The observation
   of a few hundred results of [p] may, however, convince [S] that order is
   relevant after all, that the sequence exhibits dependencies and after-effects.
   At this stage, if asked to bet again, [S] might want to abandon the as-
   sumption of exchangeability and use quite a different scheme for calculating
   his or her betting quotients. But these new betting quotients will not then be
   obtained from the old ones by Bayesian conditionalization (the dynamic
   assumption). (Gillies 1987, p. 22; Gillies uses the symbol p to denote the
   process, rather than p, but this becomes confusing as we shall see)
    However, if the probabilistic scheme is local, as ours is, then this objection
loses its force. As we noted, any change in the hypotheses under consideration
implies a change in the underlying conditions of the investigation and a
reassignment of our a priori probabilities (or betting quotients). That such a
reevaluation can be accommodated within our approach can be seen if we
recall our other requirement that, for reliability’s sake, we should consider
more than one hypothesis. Thus in Gillies’s example, we would ask S to ﬁrst of
all consider at least two hypotheses:
   h ¼ p consists of independent events (exchangeability).
   h0 ¼ p consists of dependent events (some assumption other than ex-
   changability).
These form part of the ‘‘background conditions.’’
   Given that she is told that p is random (more background), S would then
reasonably assign a higher prior probability to h than to h0 , that is:
pðhÞ > pðh0 Þ
If she is open-minded, then p(h0 ) 6¼ 0.
    Two sets of betting quotients are then made for the events {ei} of p on the
basis of each assumption respectively. After observing n events in the process,
S comes to believe that p exhibits dependencies and will therefore accord a
higher posterior probability to h0 given {en} than to h. That is,

pðh0 =fen gÞ > pðh=fen gÞ
with the posterior and prior probabilities for each hypothesis being related by
Bayes’s Theorem as usual.
   Given this result, it is then entirely rational for S to shift allegiance from h
to h0 , where such a shift involves believing that the latter is more quasi-true. If
then asked to bet again at this stage-that is, to bet on event en+1-it is then
also entirely rational for S to make this bet on the basis of the betting quo-
tients established according to h0 . The fact that these quotients are not
obtained by Bayesian conditionalization from the previous ones, based on


142   Science and Partial Truth
assumption h, should not come as any surprise, since S is now operating
within a different background context and Bayes’s Theorem applies only to
changes in our probability assignments within the same context.
   In other words, being ‘‘local’’ in our sense implies the abandonment of the
‘‘dynamic assumption,’’ at least as far as changes in the background condi-
tions are concerned (after all, who ever said that Bayes’s Theorem had to
apply to such changes as well!), and since we have, in this case, no dynamic
assumption to justify, Hacking’s objection loses its bite. This is not the only
implication of ‘‘locality,’’ and it is worth noting that it can be invoked to
overcome two further fundamental objections to the Bayesian approach in
general-namely, the problem of ‘‘old evidence’’ and the Popper-Miller ar-
gument. To see this, however, we need to introduce a modiﬁcation to our
notion of quasi truth, through the introduction of the temporal element
previously suggested.


   Pragmatic Probability and Logical Omniscience

In earlier chapters, we argued that the relationship between theory and evi-
dence, as represented by theoretical models and data models, respectively,
might not be perspicuously captured by a straightforward deductive con-
nection but by something rather more complex, such as that of ‘‘partial iso-
morphism.’’ However, a general issue arises in both this more general
perspective and the narrower ‘‘hypothetico-deductive’’ conception, and it
concerns the way in which quasi truth is understood in the context of our
grasp of the connections between theory and evidence. To focus the discus-
sion, let us consider the ‘‘hypothetico-deductive’’ approach.
    Thus, let us suppose that the relationship between theory and evidence is
captured deductively. A hypothesis, h, is conﬁrmed or disconﬁrmed by ﬁrst
deducing a consequence of it and then relating this consequence to an ob-
servation report through some mechanism or other. How is the quasi truth of h
to be understood? One way is to say that it is quasi-true if certain of its known
empirical consequences have not yet been tested or subjected to experiment.
However, this renders the quasi truth of h dependent on the will of the ex-
perimenter, the availability of money, the equipment, and other such factors.
    A more plausible view would be to say that h is regarded as quasi-true
because there always exists the possibility of further experimental evidence
being discovered within its domain. This meshes nicely with the formalism of
the partial structures approach. However, it conﬂicts with a fundamental
assumption of the standard Bayesian program, which says that all the em-
pirical consequences that can be deduced from the hypothesis have been de-
duced (Horwich 1982, p. 26; Garber 1983, p. 104). This is the assumption of
‘‘logical omniscience,’’ and it is required by the principle of coherence, which
underpins the standard subjectivist account. It can be seen quite straight-
forwardly as follows (Garber 1983, p. 104): If we were not logically omnis-
cient, then there could exist a possible state of the world in which our degree
of belief in a true sentence such as ‘‘h ‘ e,’’ say, could be less than 1. But in


                              Quasi Truth and the Nature of Induction        143
that case we would be allowed to bet that ‘‘h ‘ e’’ is false, a bet that we would
lose no matter what the state of the world, and thus coherence would be lost.
   If logical omniscience is accepted and if we are not waiting for any of the
tests of these consequences to come in, then ‘‘new’’ evidence cannot offer
either negative or positive support for the hypothesis because, to conﬁrm or
disconﬁrm it, such evidence e must bear in some way upon the observational
consequences and these have all been taken care of. To put it bluntly, there is
simply no opening in the list of consequences through which the evidence can
impinge upon the hypothesis. This is not to say that the evidence is irrelevant
with respect to the hypothesis, since it may reveal the latter’s inadequacy in
the sense of a lack of scope; that is, there may exist phenomena within the
domain of the hypothesis that are not accounted for by that hypothesis. This, of
course, is one way in which theory change is effected, but assuming logical
omniscience means that, within the hypothetico-deductive approach at least, a
hypothesis can be regarded as quasi-true, not in the sense that there may yet
be consequences of it that we are currently unaware of but just that we haven’t
yet found the time or money or resources to test all of its consequences.
   Furthermore, logical omniscience rules out the possibility of evidence that
is already known being used to support a hypothesis. Unfortunately, this is
precisely what happens in science. Thus the assumption of logical omnis-
cience prevents Bayesianism from capturing an important aspect of scientiﬁc
practice. This has been highlighted by Glymour, for example, as one of the
fundamental objections to the Bayesian program in general (Glymour 1980a).
If we take Bayes’s Theorem

pðh=eÞ ¼ pðe=hÞpðhÞ=pðeÞ

then if h ‘ e and e are already known, then

pðe=hÞ ¼ pðeÞ ¼ 1

and hence

pðh=eÞ ¼ pðhÞ

In other words, evidence that is already known cannot raise the probability of
a hypothesis. However,

   Scientists commonly argue for their theories from evidence known long
   before the theories were introduced. Copernicus argued for his theory using
   observations made over the course of millennia. . . . Newton argued for
   universal gravitation using Kepler’s second and third laws established be-
   fore the Principia was published. The argument that Einstein gave in 1915
   for his gravitational ﬁeld equations were that they explained the anomalous
   advance of Mercury, established more than half a century earlier. (Glymour
   1980a, p. 85)

   Garber has argued that we can weaken the requirement of logical om-
niscience and replace this global form of Bayesianism, in which the probability


144   Science and Partial Truth
function representing the agent’s degrees of belief is deﬁned over an ideal,
maximally ﬁne-grained scientiﬁc language, with a local form, in which the
probabilities are deﬁned over some problem-relative language only (Garber
1983). The logically possible worlds of the former are then substituted by
‘‘epistemically possible’’ ones, and the application of the Bayesian framework
becomes highly contextual, being restricted to the particular sentences and
beliefs with which one is concerned in the problem at hand. By treating sen-
tences such as h ‘ e as unanalyzable, atomic sentences, whose structure, as
expressed in some richer language, is effectively submerged in the problem-
relative language, Garber is then able to deal with the problem of ‘‘old
evidence’’: By conditionalizing on h ‘ e in these cases, one can represent the
change in belief that occurs when the agent becomes aware of this implication.
    Given the nature of partial structures, we’re happy to acknowledge the
point that the application of the Bayesian approach should be contextual.
More signiﬁcantly, perhaps, with the removal of logical omniscience, the way
is open for quasi truth to be understood within the hypothetico-deductive
framework, via an appropriate extension (da Costa and French 1988): Given
some statement h of the language L, representing the hypothesis in question,
the set of all empirical statements that are logical consequences of h, which we
know to be consequences, will be denoted by Kh. In other words, Kh ¼ {e0 : We
know that h ‘ e and e is an empirical statement}. With the introduction of a
temporal element into the relevant partial structures, Kh is deﬁned at a certain
time, t, just as when we say that P is the set of already veriﬁed statements, we
mean that these statements were veriﬁed at a certain time t. To indicate the
introduction of such a temporal element, we can simply add the subscript t to
the phrase ‘‘quasi truth.’’
    We then say that h is ‘‘quasi-truet’’ in the partial structure A if at time t the
following conditions are satisﬁed:
   1. There exists an A-normal model L such that L            h.
   2. Kh P.
We can say, loosely speaking, that h is ‘‘quasi-truet’’ in A when it does not
contradict the basic partial relations Ri and all its known consequences are
veriﬁed (at time t). When h is not ‘‘quasi-truet’’ in A, it is said to be ‘‘quasi-
falset’’ in A. If the domain under consideration is the entire universe, A can
be called a ‘‘cosmic structure.’’ In this case, if h is ‘‘quasi-truet’’ in A for all
future t, then we can say that the ‘‘quasi trutht’’ of h is ‘‘stable,’’ and, fol-
lowing the pragmatists, it seems reasonable to say that we have approached
truth. Hence ‘‘quasi-truet’’ can be considered a modiﬁcation of quasi truth.
    We can now modify the usual degree of belief in a statement r as the degree
of belief in the stable ‘‘quasi trutht’’ of r. This allows us to retain the standard
subjective probability calculus for this form of pragmatic probability, just as
we have indicated. Furthermore, with respect to certain classes of statements,
such as the observational and logical in particular, this modiﬁed degree of
belief coincides with the standard formulation. Finally, adapting our frame-
work, we can now say that our pragmatic probabilities change when we
discover that further empirical consequences can be deduced from the


                                Quasi Truth and the Nature of Induction         145
hypothesis in question and that the successful testing of such consequences
leads to an increase in our pragmatic belief in the hypothesis, in that it is now
regarded as ‘‘closer to the truth.’’ The kinematics of such modiﬁed degree of
belief change can then be represented by the instance of Bayes’s Theorem, thus:
pðh=h ‘ eÞ ¼ pðh ‘ e=hÞpðhÞ=pðh ‘ eÞ
This not only seems a natural way of understanding how a hypothesis could be
partially true in this particular context but also allows us to sidestep the famous
Popper-Miller argument against inductive probability in general.


   Pragmatic Probability and the
   Popper-Miller Argument

The argument purports to demonstrate that hypotheses cannot, in fact, re-
ceive any inductive support at all. To get the argument off the ground, then,
some deﬁnition of ‘‘support’’ is needed. One possibility is to take it as the
difference between p(h/e) and p(h); that is,
sðh=eÞ ¼ pðh=eÞ  pðhÞ
On the assumption that h ‘ e, we then have:
sðh=eÞ ¼ sðh _  e=eÞ þ sðh _ e=eÞ
Now h_e follows logically from e, so the second term represents what can be
described as the purely ‘‘deductive’’ support for the hypothesis. Therefore, any
‘‘inductive’’ support, if it exists, must lie in s(h_e/e). However,

pðh _  e=eÞ < pðh _  eÞ9
and s(h_e/e) must be negative. Hence there can be no inductive support for h.
   One very obvious response is to adopt an alternative measure of support,
such as:
s0 ðh=eÞ ¼ pðh=eÞ=pðhÞ ðRedhead 1985Þ
However, this allows e to accord h ^ k, where k is any hypothesis we like, the
same degree of support it accords h alone (Rosenkrantz 1983). This objection
has been generalized by Gillies, who points out that using this measure, the
support for h becomes independent of h itself. But if s0 (h/e) is eliminated, it
would seem that s(h/e) is the only alternative, and the Popper-Miller argu-
ment goes through.
   If s(h/e) is adopted, then the corresponding form of the argument for the
case of pragmatic probabilities is trivial. If the support accorded h by the
discovery that h ‘ e is given by
sðh=h ‘ eÞ ¼ pðh=h ‘ eÞ  pðhÞ
then we obtain,
sðh=h ‘ eÞ ¼ sðh _  ðh ‘ eÞ=h ‘ eÞ þ sðh _ ðh ‘ eÞ=h ‘ eÞ


146   Science and Partial Truth
As before, h_(h ‘ e) follows logically from h ‘ e, and so all the inductive
support is again contained in the ﬁrst term. By analogy with the earlier proof,
we have

pðh _  ðh ‘ eÞÞ ¼ pðhÞ þ pð ðh ‘ eÞÞ
Conditionalizing on h ‘ e, rather than e alone, gives an increase in the ﬁrst
term, according to Garber’s rule,

pðh=h ‘ eÞ > pðhÞ
while the second term goes to zero as before.
   Again, the conclusion is that there can be no inductive support, given this
deﬁnition of support. But what if we now adopt Redhead’s alternative? It turns
out that the Popper-Miller result can be avoided.
   Thus, we shall now deﬁne our degree of support accorded h by h ‘ e as

s0 ðh=h ‘ eÞ ¼ pðh=h ‘ eÞ=pðhÞ
If, as before, h ‘ e, then p(h ‘ e/h) 6¼ 1, since we do not have that h ‘ (h ‘ e).
Thus, from the modiﬁed version of Bayes’s Theorem given previously, we obtain

pðh=h ‘ eÞ ¼ pðh ‘ e=hÞ  pðhÞ

giving

s0 ðh=h ‘ eÞ ¼ pðh ‘ e=hÞ
As in Redhead’s attempt, the argument can no longer proceed. However, unlike
Redhead’s case, this result is immune from Gillies’s criticism, since the degree of
support in this case is not independent of the hypothesis itself.
    At ﬁrst sight, it might seem strange that the support accorded h by h ‘ e is
equal to the likelihood of h ‘ e given h, but it should be remembered that, as in
all these proofs, we have assumed from the outset that h ‘ e; that is, it is given
that p(h ‘ e) ¼ 1, and the consequence is known to be deducible from the
hypothesis. Now, it might be objected that this assumption should be dropped,
since the whole point of our earlier discussion was to try to take account of the
fact that p(h ‘ e) may not equal 1. However, the Popper-Miller argument still
fails in terms of the prior measure, since the division of the degree of support
into deductive and inductive terms is dependent on precisely this assumption.
Either way the force of the argument is avoided.
    Let us be clear about what is going on here: Since the original deﬁnition of
support, s-deﬁned as the difference between p(h/e) and p(h)-is in contra-
diction with (essentially) Bayes’s Theorem, according to which hypotheses
can be conﬁrmed (in our system), s can not be a ‘‘good’’ measure of support.
On the other hand, s0 can be used in our system as an intuitive measure of
support. Thus, these considerations show that s0 is a ‘‘good’’ support function
within our system-the appropriateness of s0 demonstrates that it is a ‘‘good’’
alternative to s. The Popper-Miller argument can be seen as generating a kind
of paradox in the ﬁeld of inductive logic, more or less similar to the Russell
paradox in set theory. As is well known, although the latter is eliminable from


                               Quasi Truth and the Nature of Induction        147
the various axiomatic systems of set theory, it nevertheless illuminates certain
problematic aspects of intuitive set theory that are difﬁcult to explain in-
formally and philosophically. Likewise, the Popper-Miller argument reveals
that a certain, apparently quite intuitive, notion of support is actually deeply
problematic, requiring a shift to a better deﬁnition.



   Quasi Truth and Idealizations

According to our deﬁnition, pragmatic or quasi truth in general, and ‘‘quasi
trutht’’ in particular, involves, above all, consistency with some knowledge
base (and in the case of ‘‘quasi trutht,’’ empirical irrefutability). But of course,
scientiﬁc hypotheses and theories are not accepted simply because they are
pragmatically true. They typically possess other relevant qualities, such as
explanatory and predictive power and simplicity. In other words, a theory has
to save the appearances, as if it were true in the correspondence sense of
truth. Thus it seems appropriate to use the subjective probability calculus,
even if only in qualitative terms, to impose some order on the set of extant
theories. In this manner, we can ‘‘probabilize’’ the acceptance of theories and
hypotheses in general.
    As we have made clear, however, this ‘‘variant’’ of quasi truth is elabo-
rated in a particular context-namely, hypothetico-deductivism. This context
may be generalized in two directions. First of all, p(h ‘ e) may be different from
1, not only because we may be ignorant of the fact that h ‘ e but also because
of the role of idealizations and approximations.10 Consider, for example, the
quantum mechanical analysis of the hydrogen bond that is so fundamental to
chemistry (this case study is taken from French and Ladyman 1998). A recent
review has emphasized, ‘‘The approximate solution of the appropriate
Schrödinger equations generates rather reliable values of the structural
parameters and the energies of the hydrogen bonds’’ (Vanquickenborne
1991, p. 32). As the author goes on to note, one of the methods used to obtain
these results is the ‘‘Hartree-Fock’’ or self-consistent ﬁeld approach. The rel-
evant idealization here is to assume that each electron in a molecule or dimer
feels only the average repulsion of the others, rather than the instantaneous
repulsion of each one. The necessity for some such idealization in the calcu-
lation of atomic structures is emphasized by Hartree himself: ‘‘For an atom or
ion of q electrons, the equation to be solved is a nonseparable partial differ-
ential equation in 3q variables (for example, for neutral Fe, q ¼ 26, 78 vari-
ables). Even for the two-electron system of neutral helium this equation has
no exact formal solution in ﬁnite terms’’ (1957, p. 16). One way of rep-
resenting a solution to the appropriate Schrödinger equation in this case
would be by means of a table giving all the numerical values. However,
suppose we were to attempt to construct such a table for the solutions of the
Schrödinger equation for one stationary state of neutral Fe:
   Tabulation has to be at discrete values of the variables, and 10 values of
   each variable would provide only a very coarse tabulation, but even this



148   Science and Partial Truth
   would require 1078 entries to cover the whole ﬁeld; and even though this
   might be reduced to, say, 578 1053 by use of the symmetry properties of
   the solution, the whole solar system does not contain enough matter to
   print such a table. And, even if it could be printed, such a table would be far
   too bulky to use. And all this is for a single stationary state of a single stage
   of ionization of a single atom. (Hartree 1957, pp. 16–17)

In such cases, an ‘‘exact’’ solution is simply not an option.11
    The question now is what particular approximations should be used.
Hartree notes that the ﬁrst is to regard each electron as being in a stationary
state in the ﬁeld of the nucleus and the other electrons. It is only in the context
of such an approximation that Pauli’s all-important Exclusion Principle makes
any sense (Hartree 1957, p. 17).
    Formally, this approximation is represented by a product wave function in
which each one-electron wave function is separated out:

¼     ð1Þ  ð2Þ . . .    ðpÞ;

where the , b, . . . , p label the one-electron wave functions and 1, 2, . . . , p
the electrons themselves. Since |c(j)|2 gives the average charge density
resulting from the presence of electron j in wave function c, each of these
separated functions can be determined as a solution of the appropriate
Schrödinger equation for one electron in the combined ﬁeld of the nucleus and
the total average charge distribution of the electrons in all the other wave
functions. The resultant ﬁeld is described as ‘‘self-consistent’’ because the ﬁeld
of the average electron distribution derived from the wave functions must be
the same as that used in evaluating them (Hartree 1957, p. 18).
    To satisfy the Pauli exclusion, principle F should be taken as a determinant
of one-electron wave functions, which, when expanded out, yields a sum of
terms, each with coefﬁcient ±1 and each representing a permutation of the
electrons among the one-electron wave functions, all such permutations
being equally probable (Hartree 1957, p. 18). Focusing now on the one-
electron wave functions themselves, if a central ﬁeld is imposed, they can be
taken to be products of the radial wave function, the variation of the wave
function with direction and the spin wave function (Hartree 1957, pp. 8–13).
In such a ﬁeld, the overall set of wave functions divides up into groups, and
the qualitative structure of the atom is then speciﬁed by the number of oc-
cupied wave functions in each of the groups, giving the conﬁguration of the
system (p. 19). This is the origin of the shells and orbitals beloved by the
quantum chemists.
    The calculation of atomic structure then proceeds in three stages (Hartree
1954, pp. 39ff.). The object of the exercise is to ﬁnd radial wave functions so that
the (approximate) energy value for the whole atomic system is stationary with
respect to variations in these wave functions. First of all, an expression for this
energy value is derived in terms of the radial wave functions. Then the equations
for the radial wave functions themselves are derived from this expression, and
ﬁnally the latter equations are solved. The system of equations can be greatly
simpliﬁed if terms resulting from the ‘‘exchange’’ of electrons between different


                                   Quasi Truth and the Nature of Induction         149
wave functions are ignored (Hartree, 1957, pp. 59–60). Whether exchange is
ignored or not, what one obtains is a set of simultaneous second-order differ-
ential equations that are typically tackled by the method of successive approx-
imation (pp. 77–100). Crucial to this method is the initial estimate of either the
radial wave functions themselves, in the case of equations with exchange, or of
the contribution to the ﬁeld of the average charge distribution of the electrons in
the relevant groups, or orbitals, in the ‘‘without exchange’’ approximation.
Once calculations of the self-consistent ﬁelds for some atoms have been carried
out, better initial estimates can be obtained by interpolation between these with
respect to atomic number (Hartree 1957, pp. 115–135).
    Coming back to the hydrogen bond, the total bond energy can be parti-
tioned into different components corresponding to (1) the purely electrostatic
interaction between the two unmodiﬁed charge densities, (2) the ‘‘exchange’’
interaction resulting from the action of the exclusion principle, (3) a polar-
ization effect, and (4) a charge transfer contribution resulting from electron
transfer between the monomers (see Vanquickenborne 1991, pp. 35–38). A
further term in the sum giving the total energy is a ‘‘mixing’’ term that would
obviously be zero if the four components were independent of one another.
Self-consistent ﬁeld methods can then be applied, and what one gets are tables
of ﬁgures giving values for the total bond energy and the various contributions
(Vanquickenborne p. 37). Better quantitative agreement can then be achieved
by including electron correlation and zero-point vibrational corrections.
    Now, what are we to make of all this? First of all, from the ‘‘extrinsic’’
perspective, the structural relations between the topmost theoretical level,
where Schrödinger’s equation lies, and the bottom-level experimental results,
together with all the idealizations and approximations in between, can be
nicely captured in terms of the framework of partial isomorphisms holding
between partial structures (French and Ladyman 1998). Second, switching to
the ‘‘intrinsic’’ view, what is conﬁrmed by the evidence in such a case is not
Schrödinger’s equation or, more generally, quantum mechanics per se, but
rather Schrödinger’s equation + assorted idealizations and approximations.
This can be seen as further support for the view that what we should be
interested in is the pragmatic truth of Schrödinger’s equation. In this case,
when we consider h ‘ e, h may be taken to be the relevant hypothesis +
associated idealizations and approximations. Conceiving of the relationship
between theory and evidence in deductive terms does not adequately match
the practice of science, as we have tried to indicate with our structuralist
considerations previously, but nevertheless, it is the basis for many, if not all,
of the applications of the subjective probability calculus. Our intention is
simply to suggest that, in this context, pragmatic probability may offer a more
appropriate way forward.
    This brings us to the second direction in which one may proceed from these
considerations. The strict hypothetico-deductive view represents just one
rather narrow approach to the relationship between theory and evidence. As
we have indicated before, the complexity of structural relationships between
models might lead one to conclude that there is more to the theory-evidence
relationship than can be captured purely by entailment. One of the better


150   Science and Partial Truth
known alternatives is Glymour’s ‘‘bootstrapping’’ strategy (Glymour 1980a;
see also the collection of essays in Earman 1983), which, expressed rather
crudely (see, for example, Edidin 1983, p. 43), relates a given hypothesis to
evidence in the following way: Observation sentences expressing the evidence
in question are conjoined with auxiliary hypotheses to entail ‘‘intermediate
theoretical sentences,’’ which then conﬁrm the given hypothesis, relative to
the set of auxiliary hypotheses. The strategy was termed a form of ‘‘boot-
strapping’’ because, in the original form in which Glymour presented it, the
set of auxiliary hypotheses could include or imply the hypothesis to be tested,
with possible trivialization ruled out by the condition that there be possible
examples of evidence, consistent with the auxiliary hypotheses, which would
disconﬁrm the hypothesis under test.12 One of the more signiﬁcant virtues of
this account is that it allows for the selective testing of hypotheses and elim-
inates the kind of holism that ‘‘transmits’’ conﬁrmation, so that conﬁrmation
of one hypothesis of a theory conﬁrms all. Glymour’s strategy allows for
certain hypotheses to be conﬁrmed, relative to the background set, but not
others.
    The relative aspect of this account is one of its important features. An-
other is the central idea of ‘‘moving up,’’ as it were, from the evidence
toward the hypothesis with the help of the auxiliaries; thus the strategy can
be viewed as a variant of ‘‘deduction from the phenomena,’’ which ﬁnds
historical exemplars in the work of Newton, for example, and which has been
developed and advocated by Dorling (1973).13 The third aspect to note here
concerns the next stage-that is, the relationship between the intermediate
sentences and the hypothesis. Glymour originally developed a ‘‘Hempelian’’
version of this strategy whereby the intermediates are understood to be
‘‘instances’’ of the hypothesis being tested. Positive and negative instances
give positive and negative conﬁrmation, respectively. However, the strategy
could incorporate alternative relationships between the hypothesis and the
intermediates.
    Before we consider that, there are two further points to note. The ﬁrst
concerns the representation of theories and hypotheses within this account.
Glymour originally applied his strategy to theories stated in equational form
and then also for theories formulated in a ﬁrst-order language. Van Fraassen
has shown how the central insights of the account were contained in the
former and has given a reformulation of it in terms of the model-theoretic
approach (van Fraassen 1983, pp. 25–42). Thus from the representational
standpoint, at least, there is nothing to prevent us from adopting the strategy.
However, there is the further issue of whether it can be adapted to a Bayesian,
rather than Hempelian, view of conﬁrmation in general. Despite his concerns
about Bayesianism expressed in Theory and Evidence (one such being the
problem of old evidence discussed previously), Glymour himself has indicated
how it might be combined with his bootstrap strategy (Glymour 1980b).14
What he does is simply to apply subjective probability to the relationship
between the intermediate sentences and the hypothesis. However, Horwich
has claimed that this collapses the bootstrap strategy into nothing more than
a form of probabilistic conﬁrmation theory (Horwich 1980).


                              Quasi Truth and the Nature of Induction       151
    A more interesting approach and potentially fruitful approach is suggested
by Garber, who extends the approach of deﬁning probability functions over
instances of h ‘ e, to deﬁning it over instances of the relation ‘e conﬁrms h (in
the bootstrap manner) relative to h’, where h0 is some auxiliary hypothesis (or
set of such hypotheses; 1983, pp. 123–127). He takes this as doing two
things: First, it satisﬁes the concern that Garber understands Glymour to
have-namely, that ‘‘what should be of interest to conﬁrmation theory is not
degrees of belief and their relations, but the precise nature of the structural or
logical or mathematical relations between hypothesis and evidence by virtue
of which the evidence conﬁrms the hypothesis’’ (Garber 1983, p. 124). Sec-
ond, it ﬁlls in a gap that Garber takes to exist in Glymour’s account-namely,
that as it stands the account doesn’t give a comparative evaluation of different
bootstrapping conﬁrmations. Yet, Garber insists, this is crucial, since for al-
most any hypothesis h and evidence e there exists some auxiliary hypothesis
by which e conﬁrms h in bootstrap fashion. What we want is a way of dis-
tinguishing the interesting cases of such conﬁrmation from the less interesting
or even trivial.
    Garber suggests that his framework is ‘‘ready-made’’ (1983, p. 127) to
plug the gap since, he insists, almost everything he said regarding the problem
of old evidence holds good for whatever logical relation we like, including the
bootstrap form: ‘‘Within this framework, we can show how the discovery that
a given e BS (bootstrap) conﬁrms h with respect to T may increase our con-
ﬁdence in h, given one set of priors, and how, given other priors, the discovery
that e BS conﬁrms h with respect to T may have little or no effect on our
conﬁdence in h’’ (p. 127). Following along in Garber’s wake, we can then
further adapt this to our account, where the conﬁdence in h is understood not
to be that h is true but that it is ‘‘quasi-truet,’’ of course.
    There are two further points to note about this. The ﬁrst is whether Gly-
mour’s approach to conﬁrmation ﬁts better with scientiﬁc practice as rep-
resented in the brief case study of quantum chemistry given before. Exploring
this in appropriate detail would greatly extend the present chapter, but it is
worth noting that the bootstrap strategy more naturally accommodates the
way in which the conﬁrmation of a particular hypothesis draw upon other
hypotheses, such as Pauli’s Exclusion Principle. Given that one of the declared
advantages of the model-theoretic approach is that it incorporates the way in
which a whole nexus of theories and models can feature in an explanation, for
example, Glymour’s strategy might be the natural one to adopt within the
model-theoretic framework in general.
    The second point is whether Glymour’s conﬁrmational relation appro-
priately parallels the previously mentioned representational relations of partial
isomorphisms. Here we must appeal to the extrinsic-intrinsic distinction again.
Partial isomorphisms holding between partial structures concern the former,
whereas quasi truth, ‘‘quasi trutht’’ degree of belief, and the like ﬁnd their
place within the context of the latter. Obviously, it makes no sense to talk of
isomorphisms, partial or full, holding between propositions. Thus, on the in-
trinsic side, there may be a variety of ways of capturing the sorts of con-
siderations that led to the introduction of partial structures as representational


152   Science and Partial Truth
devices, by means of the familiar relationships that hold between propositions.
One has already been indicated: We consider a straightforward deductive
relationship between h and e and accommodate idealizations and approx-
imations by shifting to a new hypothesis h0 . An alternative is offered by the
bootstrap mechanism, which seems to more naturally incorporate the de-
pendence of h’s conﬁrmation on other hypotheses. There may, of course, be
other conﬁrmatory relationships that better suit those aspects of practice that
have led us to introduce partial structures, but we shall leave the exploration
of these to future works.



   The ‘‘Problem’’ of Induction

What about the so-called problem of induction? This can be conveniently
reduced to the following set of three questions (de Oliveira 1985):
   1. What is the nature of the attitude of acceptance that we adopt in
      relation to scientiﬁc theories?
   2. What are the rules of acceptance for such theories?
   3. What is the justiﬁcation for the adoption of those rules?
    We have already given an answer to the ﬁrst question in terms of the
‘‘pragmatic’’ acceptance of a theory: To pragmatically accept a theory means
to believe that it has not been refuted within the domain of knowledge it
models and that it is pragmatically or quasi-true. This belief in the theory’s
pragmatic truth is then reﬂected in our subjective probability assignment.
Thus we claim that one should accept a hypothesis that has an a posteriori
pragmatic probability of 1, where this value reﬂects our degree of belief in the
partial or quasi truth only of the hypothesis. It is worthwhile comparing this
with Shimony’s tempered personalism approach, where he argues that we
should accept a hypothesis with an a posteriori probability close to, but not
equal to, 1 (Shimony 1970, pp. 120–121 and 130–131), the difference ex-
pressing the tentative attitude maintained toward the hypothesis. On our
view, however, this tentative attitude is reﬂected, not in terms of a difference
in numerical values, but rather in terms of the difference between quasi truth
and truth simpliciter. This, we would insist, is a more intuitive and convenient
way of capturing the idea that commitment to a hypothesis is weaker than
belief in its literal truth.15
    Turning now to the second of our questions, in the present context this can
be broken down into two parts:
   1. What are the rules for the a priori selection of theories?
   2. What are the rules for the a posteriori acceptance of theories?
   In the ﬁrst case, the problem in the context of induction is that of ruling out
‘‘absurd’’ or ‘‘ridiculous’’ hypotheses to begin with, or, put yet another way,
how can we guarantee that the hypotheses to which we assign our initial
degrees of belief are ‘‘serious’’ (Shimony 1970, pp. 110–114; de Oliveira
1985, pp. 136–137)? We have already indicated an answer in terms of a


                               Quasi Truth and the Nature of Induction        153
plausible set of heuristic criteria for theory development and pursuit. Granted
that it is difﬁcult to codify a set of rules, per se, that can unambiguously
distinguish those hypotheses that are ‘‘seriously’’ proposed from those that
are not, nevertheless, such criteria can function as methodologically sensible
guidelines for choosing the hypotheses of our initial set. It is, perhaps, worth
pointing out that there is usually a general and intuitive agreement within a
particular scientiﬁc community about which hypotheses are to be taken
seriously within the relevant domain. And in particular we would emphasize
that scientiﬁc hypotheses are not proposed within an intellectual vacuum but
are put forward in the context of certain background information that confers
an initial plausibility upon them even before ‘‘experience’’ is brought to bear.
This ‘‘initial plausibility’’ can then be captured by our prior probability as-
signments. Thus we may invoke these heuristic criteria to account for the
restriction, in practice, of the set of alternative hypotheses to be formulated in
order to increase the reliability of our inductive conclusions.
   In the case of question 2b, our answer is simply that such rules are em-
bodied in the calculus of pragmatic probability. We accept a hypothesis h
when its pragmatic probability, conditional on evidence e, is equal to 1, re-
ﬂecting our belief in the quasi truth of h as we have said. And also, as we have
just noted, the conditionalization may not be just on the evidence but, in some
cases, on the existence of a connection between the hypothesis and the evi-
dence, as expressed by the statement ‘‘h implies e.’’
   Finally, we come to question 3. This concerns the issue of the justiﬁcation
of our inductive mechanisms, commonly regarded as ‘‘the’’ problem of in-
duction. There has, of course, been an enormous amount written about this,
and we do not propose to survey this material here. Our claim is straight-
forward: If it is rational to accept the axioms and rules of the pragmatic
probability calculus, then it is rational to accept inductive inferences. Thus
consider Russell’s Principle of Induction (Russell 1912):
   (Ia) When a thing of a certain sort A has been found to be associated
   with a thing of another certain sort B and has never been found not to
   be associated with a thing of sort B, the greater is the probability that
   they will be associated in a fresh case in which one of them is known to
   be present.
   (Ib) Under the same circumstances, a sufﬁcient number of cases of
   association will make the probability of a fresh association nearly a
   certainty and will make it approach certainty without limit.
   (IIa) The greater the number of cases in which a thing of the sort A has
   been found associated with a thing of the sort B, the more probable it is
   (if no cases of failure of association are known) that A is always asso-
   ciated with B.
   (IIb) Under the same circumstances, a sufﬁcient number of cases of the
   association of A with B will make it nearly certain that A is always
   associated with B and will make this general law approach certainty
   without limit.
Of course, it is difﬁcult to say precisely what Russell really meant by his
principle (what kind of probability he had in mind and so forth). However, our



154   Science and Partial Truth
intention, again, is not historical exegesis: We simply want to remark here
that there is a sense in which it can be envisaged as providing a rationale for
induction. It can be shown that Ia to IIb are, with certain restrictions, theo-
rems of the subjectivist probability calculus (da Costa and French 1991b; see
appendix).16 Thus, if the axioms of this calculus are at all rationally grounded,
then so is Russell’s principle. Since the latter obviously constitutes a good
rationale for induction, we thereby obtain a rationale for this kind of in-
ference.
    It is important to emphasize that our claim is not that these results show
that by means of simple induction we are able to attain ‘‘the truth’’ (which
shouldn’t be our goal anyway!) but rather that if it is rational to believe in the
axioms of the probability calculus, then it is rational to believe in simple
induction. Perhaps this is the sole justiﬁcation of induction that we are able to
obtain in this context. And since all forms of inductive argument can be
reduced to simple induction, we then have a justiﬁcation of induction in
general. Thus, the gist of our position is not that we are able to show that
induction brings us to the truth but only that without it we are not rational.
    This brings us up against the ‘‘problem of rationality’’ in general and the
question of why it is rational to believe the axioms of the probability calculus
in particular. The following points are worth noting: First of all, as Black has
emphasized (1970, pp. 57–90), we must step out from under the shadow of
deductive reasoning. In particular, ‘‘Addicts of deduction should not harbor
ﬂattering illusions’’ (p. 144). If there is a problem of justifying induction, then
there is one of justifying deduction also (da Costa 1981, pp. 2–10): Why and
how does deduction function in the way that it does? Does the underlying
language of a deduction reﬂect reality? If not, then our deduction is vacuous,
but if so, then how do we know that it does? By induction?!
    Second, and relatedly, to argue that ‘‘anything less than true conclusions
following from true premises is not genuinely reasonable’’ is to use a too re-
strictive sense of reasonableness (Black 1970, pp. 66–67). Placed in the context
of the history of science and our previous discussion, this argument is itself
unreasonable! A wider, more pragmatic, more realistic sense of reasonableness
is clearly required, linked in turn to a clariﬁcation of the apparent mystery
surrounding the raison d’être of induction (Black 1970, p. 67). The latter, we
claim, is to lead us to ‘‘partial’’ or ‘‘quasi’’ truth, rather than truth itself, and it
is this which makes it reasonable to believe in inductive arguments.



   Appendix: Justifying Induction

In the following H denotes a hypothesis (a possible law, etc.), E the initial
evidence, and Qi, i ¼ 1,2, . . . , n, n distinct consequences of H (and E). We thus
have:
H ^ E ‘ Qi ; i ¼ 1; 2; . . . ; n:

 i will denote Q1 ^ Q2 ^    ^ Qi :
Q


                                    Quasi Truth and the Nature of Induction        155
In particular, H may be the proposition Vx (x 2 A ! x 2 B)-that is, ‘‘All As
                                                                                i
are Bs,’’ and Qi, the statement, ‘‘xi, which belongs to A, also belongs to B.’’ Q
will then express the fact that i members of A are also members of the class B.

THEOREM 1. If P(Qi, Q   i1 ^ E) 6¼ 1, P(H, E) > 0, and P(Qi, Q
                                                                i1 ^ E) 6¼ 0, then
P(H, Q                i1 ^ E).
      i ^ E) > P(H, Q

PROOF. We obviously have:

                   PðH; EÞ
PðH; Q1 ^ EÞ ¼
                   PðQ1 ; EÞ

                        1 ^EÞ
PðH; Q ^ Q ^ EÞ ¼ PðH;Q
....................................
        2      1     2 1  PðQ ;Q ^EÞ
                          
        i ^ EÞ ¼ PðH;Qi1 ^EÞ
  PðH; Q                ^EÞ
                  PðQ ;Q  i    i1



             i1 ^ E) 6¼ 1, we therefore obtain:
Since P(Qi, Q
PðH; Q                i1 ^ EÞ:
      i ^ EÞ > PðH; Q

Thus, when H is Vx(x 2 A ! x 2 B), we obtain part Ia of Russell’s principle.

THEOREM 2. (Jeffreys-Wrinch). Suppose that P(H, E) 6¼ 0. Then,
            n1 ^ EÞ ¼ 1
lim PðQn ; Q
n!1

PROOF. Clearly,
       n ; EÞ ¼ PðH; EÞPðQ
PðH ^ Q                    n ; E ^ HÞ

Since E ^ H ‘ Qi, i ¼ 1, 2, . . . , n, we have that:
       n ; EÞ ¼ PðH; EÞ
PðH ^ Q
On the other hand, it is easy to see that:
       n ; EÞ ¼ PðH; E ^ Q
PðH ^ Q                    n Þ n PðQi ; Q
                                           i1 ^ EÞ
                                 i¼1

Consequently,

          nÞ ¼ Q          PðH; EÞ
PðH; E ^ Q       n                
                      i¼1 PðQ i ; Qi1 ^ EÞ

               n)  1. Therefore,
But, P(H, E ^ Q
Y
n
              i1 ^ EÞ
      PðQi ; Q                PðH; EÞ
i¼1

We easily deduce that
Y
n
              i1 ^ EÞ
      PðQi ; Q
i¼1




156      Science and Partial Truth
converges for n ! ? and that:

            n1 ^ EÞ ¼ 1
lim PðQn ; Q
n!1

If H is Vx(x 2 A ! x 2 B), then the theorem just proved shows that when the
number of instances of a law increases indeﬁnitely, then the probability of a
new positive instance tends to 1. We have thus proved part Ib of Russell’s
principle.

THEOREM 3. Let A and B be two ﬁnite classes such that the proportion of
As that are Bs is r. Then the probability that a random x 2 A belongs also
to B is r.

PROOF. Let us suppose that n is the number of elements of A and that m is the
number of elements of A \ B. Then, there are n possible, equally probable
cases, of which m are favorable. Therefore, the subjective probability that a
random x that belongs to A also belongs to B is m/n-that is, r. (It is con-
venient to insist that this theorem is not true by the deﬁnition of probability; it
has to be proved.)

THEOREM 4. A and B are two classes, A being ﬁnite and very large. Then
      n) approaches 1 as n increases, where H is Vx(x 2 A ! x 2 B).
P(H, Q

PROOF. Bayes’s Theorem gives us:

                            
      n ^ EÞ ¼ PPðH; EÞPðQn ; H ^ EÞ
PðH; Q
                  PðHi ; EÞPðQ n ; Hi ^ EÞ
                   i

where Hi stands for the proposition that the proportion of As that are Bs is i; in
particular, H1 is H.
   Since in, i < 1, approaches 0 as n increases, it follows that:
X                                 X
                 n ; Hi ^ EÞ ¼
     PðHi ; EÞPðQ                     PðHi ; EÞ in
 i                                i

                                              n, H ^ E) ¼ 1, we conclude that
approaches P(H, E) as n increases. Because P(Q
     
P(H, Qn ^ E) approaches 1.
   We have thus proved IIb for large, ﬁnite classes-perhaps the really im-
portant case. Two further points regarding this proof should be noted:
      i. Sampling with replacement is presupposed, although this is, of course,
         unproblematic.
     ii. A need not be assumed to be very large. Suppose that A has k
         elements. Then the ‘‘next’’ value of i below 1 will be k1/k and with
         n ¼ k, (k1/k)n will be around 1/e-which is not so small-and we
         may well still be a very long way from P(H, Q  n ^ E) being close to 1.
         (We owe this last point to Jeff Paris.)



                                  Quasi Truth and the Nature of Induction       157
There is then no difﬁculty in proving the next proposition:

THEOREM 5. Given the conditions of the preceding theorem (and presuppos-
ing the invariance of probability under ‘‘random permutations’’) we have:
PðQ        nÞ
   nþ1 ; Q             n; Q
                     PðQ     n1 Þ

Thus, IIa is also true, for large, ﬁnite classes. (The relevance of probabilities
with regard to ﬁnite sets is discussed in Russell 1948.)
    We have therefore essentially proved Russell’s principle of induction. In
synthesis, these theorems show that the axioms of subjective probability imply
Ia to IIb. Thus, if these axioms are rationally grounded, then induction is also.
Using second-order probabilities (see Gardenfors and Saklin 1982), we can
obtain another version of IIb that does not presuppose that the class A is ﬁnite.
The same is true with regard to IIa.
    A further important result, which may be used to support certain inductive
inferences, is the following:

THEOREM 6 (Keynes). If P(H, E) 6¼ 0, then we have:

      n ^ EÞ ¼                       PðH; EÞ
PðH; Q                            n ; E ^  HÞð1  PðH; EÞÞ
                     PðH; EÞ þ PðQ

PROOF. Obviously:
   n ; EÞ ¼ PðQ
PðQ             n ^ H; EÞ þ PðQ
                                n ^  H; EÞ

On the other hand,
   n ^ H; EÞ ¼ PðH; EÞ and PðQ
PðQ                            n ; H ^ EÞ ¼ 1

But,
      n ^ EÞ PðQ
PðH; Q           n ; EÞ ¼ PðQ
                              n ; H ^ EÞ PðH; EÞ

Therefore,
      n ^ EÞ½PðQ
PðH; Q           n ^ H; EÞ þ PðQ
                                 n ^  H; EÞ ¼ PðH; EÞ

Consequently,

      n ^ EÞ ¼                 PðH; EÞ
PðH; Q                                n ^  H; EÞ
                     PðQn ^ H; EÞ þ PðQ
                              PðH; EÞ
                 ¼                n ^  H; EÞ
                     PðH; EÞ þ PðQ
                                  PðH; EÞ
                 ¼                n ;  H ^ EÞPð H; EÞ
                     PðH; EÞ þ PðQ
                                     PðH; EÞ
                 ¼                n ;  H ^ EÞð1  PðH; EÞÞ
                     PðH; EÞ þ PðQ




158    Science and Partial Truth
                                                      n,  H ^ E) ! 0 as
COROLLARY. Given the conditions of the theorem, if P(Q
n ! ?, then it follows that,
          n ^ EÞ ¼ 1
lim PðH; Q
n!1

This corollary gives us a sufﬁcient condition for
      n ^ EÞ ! 1 as n ! 1
PðH; Q
that is, a condition for the probability of a hypothesis to be near 1, when the
number of instances increases indeﬁnitely (IIb in another form).




                              Quasi Truth and the Nature of Induction      159
         8
         FROM PRAGMATIC REALISM TO
         STRUCTURAL EMPIRICISM

Throughout this book we have touched on issues to do with the realism-
antirealism debate, without getting too tied up with the details (for an account
of the current ‘‘state of play,’’ see Psillos 2000). In part, this is because we feel
that our framework can be pressed into service by either side in this debate.
Indeed, this is precisely what has happened. Ladyman has incorporated par-
tial structures into his version of ‘‘structural realism,’’ which he sees as rea-
lism’s best hope in the face of the ontological perplexities presented by modern
physics. On the other side of the divide, Bueno has also used partial structures
to elaborate a form of ‘‘structural empiricism,’’ which extends van Fraassen’s
antirealist ‘‘constructive empiricism’’ in signiﬁcant respects. Before we get to
these more recent positions, let us consider what light our account can shed
on the debate.



   Realism, Antirealism, and Quasi Truth

In what we shall call its ‘‘standard’’ form, realism is encapsulated in the twin
theses that (1) the laws of theories that can be described as ‘‘mature’’ are
typically approximately true1 and (2) the theoretical and observational terms
of such theories typically refer (Putnam 1978, pp. 20–21; Boyd 1973). Both
theses have come in for severe criticism.
   Thesis 1 has had to face the perceived difﬁculties in articulating a ‘‘coherent
notion’’ of approximate truth (Laudan 1996, pp. 118–121). One response has
been to appeal to certain accounts of verisimilitude that are not only highly
formal but also quantitative in nature (see, for example, Kuipers 2000; for an
overview, see Psillos 1999, chapter 11). These, in turn, have run into a series
of problems, the most notable of which appear to demonstrate that the
‘‘metric’’ of approximate truth must be highly contextual. Such problems have


                                        160
led Giere2 to dismiss approximate truth as a ‘‘bastard semantic relationship’’
(1988, p. 106), preferring instead his account of ‘‘similarity,’’ taken as prim-
itive. Despite this dismissal, Psillos, in his more recent defense of ‘‘standard’’
realism (1999), has suggested that Giere’s approach does in fact capture the
intuitive appeal of approximate truth (p. 275). However, in building on this
skeleton, Psillos not only does not provide a formal account of the latter notion
but also insists that such a failing should not be seen as a defect (p. 277). He
argues, ﬁrst, ‘‘There is an irreducible qualitative element in the notion of ap-
proximation, i.e. the respects in and degrees to which one description may be
said to approximate another’’ (p. 278), and second, that we have no need for
the equivalent of a Tarskian formal account of approximate truth, since our
intuitive understanding of the latter does not generate paradoxes, unlike the
case of correspondence truth itself (p. 278).
    Now we certainly agree that highly quantitative approaches are about as
illuminating as spelling out the change in one’s degree of belief to the ﬁfth
decimal place. Nevertheless, there are good reasons for going beyond the
‘‘intuitive understanding’’ of approximate truth to a more formal account,
reasons similar to those listed by Sklar in the quotation cited in chapter 2.3
Certainly, one might argue that without such an account, one cannot begin
to investigate whether the aforementioned ‘‘intuitive understanding’’ is rid-
dled with problems or even consistent. As Mikenberg, da Costa, and Chuaqui
noted in their original paper (1986), the formalism of quasi truth might be
employed here as a form of approximate truth. Since quasi truth is a con-
textual notion, relative to a given partial structure, we would expect to be able
to accommodate the contextuality within our approach. Furthermore, we
have already indicated how Giere’s vague notion of ‘‘similarity’’ can be
captured more rigorously through partial isomorphisms holding between
partial structures. And ﬁnally, the whole point of this book is to defend the
claim that quasi truth and the attendant formal mechanisms of partial
structures and partial isomorphisms is richer than the Tarskian notion and
better suited to capturing scientiﬁc practice. However, having said that, one
might expect that in applying quasi truth to realism, the standard position
will have to be recast.
    Recalling the formal expression of a partial structure, let us begin with the
following questions, which quite naturally arise: ‘‘what is the nature of the
domain D?’’ and ‘‘What are to be included as members of the set A?’’ These
are, of course, intimately connected.
    Taking these questions in order, it is worth noting the distinction between
the domain of knowledge that a theory should account for and the domain that
it actually does account for successfully (see, for example, Nickles 1977, p. 583).
Relative to the latter, a theory is pragmatically true forever, as we have em-
phasized: This is why we can still use classical mechanics to build bridges, and,
so forth. However, it is by means of the ﬁrst domain that a theory’s deﬁciencies
are illuminated, and thus it is via the mismatch between these two kinds of
domain that a theory is shown to be inadequate, leading to the search for a
better one. The difference is therefore important because it effectively drives the
machinery of theory change and scientiﬁc progress in general.


                     From Pragmatic Realism to Structural Empiricism 161
   With regard to the exact nature of these domains, and of the former kind in
particular, we note that the set of distinguished sentences, or primary state-
ments, P, will in general include both (from the realist’s perspective) true
decidable sentences, such as observation statements, and certain general
propositions encompassing laws already assumed to be true. Thus, D is not
merely a collection of phenomena but is ordered in some way by these laws,
together with symmetry principles and the like. If science is understood as
cumulative, in the fashion we have tried to defend here, with at least part of
the structure of its predecessor preserved through theory change, then D may
be taken to include these latter aspects as well (cf. Shapere 1977). In this case,
the very concept of ‘‘domain’’ becomes a ‘‘pretheoretic’’ notion, in the sense
that it is described at least in part within the language of previous theories.
Modeling D may then actually generate a different domain to be modeled by
future theories.4
   This brings us to the question of what to include in A and our attitude
toward the members of this set. As we have said, A will in general include
both nontheoretical and theoretical terms. With regard to the latter, further
discriminations need to be imposed. Some of the theoretical terms in A will
refer to unobservable entities, but some will be ‘‘idealization terms’’ such as
‘‘point particle’’ and ‘‘rigid rod.’’ Furthermore, within the subset of terms that
are not idealizations, not all will be held to refer with the same strength of
conviction. The partial structures approach can deal with each of these as-
pects of the set A.


   Idealization Terms

First of all, there is the obvious point that the entities to which idealization
terms refer are typically understood not to exist, or at least not in this, the
actual, world. And the reasons for such an understanding are, as Shapere has
emphasized, primarily scientiﬁc (Shapere 1969) in the sense that rigid rods
are ruled out by Special Relativity (Shapere 1969, pp. 132–137; Maidens
1998), and likewise it is a consequence of the Lorentz theory of the electron
that it cannot be a point particle (Shapere 1969, pp. 138–146). Hence we see
immediately that the ‘‘understanding’’ must be amended: These entities are
taken not to exist in the world as described by a particular theory. Never-
theless, it is convenient for reasons of computational tractability, for example,
to invoke such notions in the treatment of certain problems. Thus they feature
in theories or versions of theories or, more generally, models that are corre-
spondingly convenient, computationally tractable, and so on.
    How should we regard such idealizations? An extreme view is to take the
terms involved as referring to entities that exist in other possible worlds
(Nowak 1995). Quite apart from the trans-Lewisian nature of this vision, it
has dubious metaphysics at its base: Idealization differs from abstraction in
that omitting the dimensions of a particle supposedly no longer yields a
physical body at all. Thus whereas abstraction leads to generalizations,



162   Science and Partial Truth
idealization takes us out of this world altogether. A metaphysically more
conservative account is indicated by Grobler: ‘‘idealization consists in speci-
fying in advance the kinds of predicates expected to occur in claims being
made in a given context about objects of a given kind, rather than in referring
to some ﬁctitious, idealized objects’’ (1995, p. 42). In particular, describing an
electron as a mass-point does not amount to substituting for it by some
Platonic object; rather, the description is simply an indication of the relative
irrelevance of the particle’s dimensions in that theoretical context (Grobler
1995, p. 42).
    It is this context-dependence of idealizations that is all important; indeed, it
is precisely the context that delineates the idealization, as we indicated pre-
viously. Let us be more explicit and take the example of the electron: In
describing the electron as pointlike, we are obviously excluding spatial di-
mension from the list of predicates characterizing it. Nevertheless, the intrinsic
properties of the electron are retained-properties like mass, spin, and charge-
else we could not refer to what is being described as an electron. And this
description features in, and is part of, the construction of an appropriate model.
It is not the case that the description stands free of the theoretical context, so
that we can talk of this idealized electron as a separate entity, existing in some
possible world perhaps; rather, the idealization is bound to the model. Recalling
Shapere’s point that this model will be acknowledged as deﬁcient precisely in
those respects in which the electron is regarded as dimensionless, we can say
that idealization involves ‘‘as if’’ description: The electron is treated as if it were
pointlike and rods are treated as if they were rigid.
    But now this ‘‘as if’’ aspect suggests a way of treating assertions involving
idealizations from an epistemic perspective. Shapere notes that entire theories
might be conceived of as idealizations in the sense that, although there are
good grounds for regarding the theories as false, nevertheless it may be
convenient to take them as if they were true. Thus, for example, although
geometrical optics is known to be false, in that it cannot account for dif-
fraction phenomena, it is still used as an idealization for treating a wide range
of other phenomena (Shapere 1969, pp. 152–154). Likewise, as we have
already said, Newtonian mechanics may still be used as if it were true for the
purposes of building bridges and launching rockets and the like. The theory of
quasi truth can then be used to formally underpin the claim that idealizations
are regarded as if they were true. Furthermore, it can be extended to cover not
just the case of theories as idealizations in the sense previously noted but also
that of idealization terms, where these are thought of as idealizing descriptions
laid down within a theoretical context. To describe an electron as if it were a
point particle is to lay down a bundle of properties that have meaning only
within a model or, more generally, a structure; thus the ‘‘as if’’ character of
such idealization terms gets shifted to that of the embedding context. Our
epistemic attitude to the latter can then be grounded in the notion of prag-
matic or quasi truth (and as we have indicated in chapter 7, the structural
aspects of this approach suggest an account of theoretical idealization in
general).



                      From Pragmatic Realism to Structural Empiricism 163
   A Differentiated Ontological Attitude

As well as acknowledging the difference between those terms that are
‘‘idealizations’’ and those that are taken to genuinely refer, the realist must
also accommodate a ‘‘differentiated’’ attitude with regard to the latter (see
Fine 1984). The assertions involving such terms make claims of varying
degrees of strength, depending on, among other things, the status of the
theories in which they occur. The difference in this degree of strength cor-
responds to the difference in the scientists’ degree of belief in such claims and
in the existence of the entities referred to. Thus at one end of the spectrum,
they will include claims about entities that were once asserted to exist but are
not now regarded as existing, such as phlogiston; at the other, they will
include claims about entities that are now deﬁnitely considered to exist, such
as electrons; and in the middle, there will be claims about entities, such as
magnetic monopoles and tachyons, whose existence has not yet been estab-
lished but that still feature in certain theories. The example of quarks, referred
to earlier in this book, provides a nice example of an entity moving through
the spectrum, as it were, from something introduced as a kind of bookkeeping
device to something elevated to the status of one of the ‘‘basic building blocks’’
of the universe.
    What is needed is a way of accommodating all these different attitudes to
the ‘‘scientiﬁc zoo.’’ The most obvious is to introduce a formal characteriza-
tion of degrees of belief that permits exactly the kind of gradation in our
attitude toward theoretical entities that a more sophisticated realism requires.
Three issues need to be addressed in setting up such a framework. The ﬁrst
concerns the propositional subject of the belief, the second has to do with the
changes in such beliefs and the forces that drive such changes, and the third
issue relates to the topic of chapter 7-namely, whether the degree of belief
should be taken to be in the truth of the relevant proposition or its quasi truth.
Let us brieﬂy consider each of these in turn.
    What we are concerned about here are existence claims, rather than
claims to do with the truth or quasi truth of the theories per se, although, as
we shall see, the two are related. Typically, of course, the propositions con-
cerned will have the form ‘‘electrons/phlogiston/quarks exist,’’ and some of
the relevant beliefs will be held with a very high degree of conﬁdence,
some with a very low degree of conﬁdence, and others, the majority per-
haps, with an intermediate range of such degrees. Such a characterization
strongly motivates a probabilistic approach, which Horwich, for example,
suggests may cut across the realism-antirealism divide (Horwich 1982, pp.
134–136). Although we are obviously sympathetic to this perspective, the
‘‘cut’’ is not so clean as Horwich appears to think, and his ‘‘modulated realism
or sophisticated instrumentalism’’ leaves a number of crucial issues un-
touched.
    Taking realism ﬁrst, Horwich acknowledges the point that it ‘‘comes to
grief over the history of science’’ (1982, p. 135) for reasons to do with what is
now known as the ‘‘pessimistic meta-induction.’’ This is the argument,
usually attributed to Laudan (1996), which has the following form:


164   Science and Partial Truth
   Premise 1: Entity a, put forward by x, in historical period p1, was sub-
    sequently agreed not to exist.
    Premise 2: Entity b, put forward by y, in historical period p2, was sub-
    sequently agreed not to exist.
    Premise 3: Entity c, put forward by z, in historical period p3, was sub-
   sequently agreed not to exist.
   ..
    .
   Premise n: Entity i, put forward by w, in historical period pn, was sub-
   sequently agreed not to exist.
   (Inductive) Conclusion: The entities put forward by today’s scientists
   will subsequently be agreed not to exist.
The conclusion is then seen as undermining the traditional realist view that
we should accept current scientiﬁc theories as the best guide to how the world
actually is and that we should take the entities referred to by the relevant
theoretical terms as existing (Horwich 1982). Of course, the strength of this
conclusion depends on that of the premises and hence on the kinds of entities
labeled by the x, y, z, and so forth. Thus one might take an eclectic approach
to the history of science and include the Aristotelian crystalline spheres,
phlogiston, caloric, light as corpuscles, the optical ether, light as waves, the
electromagnetic ether, and so on. The realist can then mount a response by
rejecting certain of these entities as belonging to ‘‘immature’’ theories, thus
cutting down the list of premises. Unfortunately, even with a clear char-
acterization of maturity in terms of predictive success, say (see n. 1), this still
leaves a goodly number of premises to take account of. Hence, the conclusion
that has often been drawn is that ‘‘it would be quite wrong to embrace realism
and believe that our present scientiﬁc theories are true’’ (Horwich 1982; see
also Laudan 1996).
    One alternative is to adopt some form of instrumentalism that takes the-
ories to be no more than convenient and economic ways of systematizing
data, whose theoretical terms are not to be taken as referring at all, and
therefore the theories themselves are not candidates for being regarded as
either true or false; that is, they are not ‘‘truth-apt.’’ If realism errs on the side
of inclusiveness, then instrumentalism moves too far in the opposite direction.
This form of antirealism has now fallen out of favor and the leading contender
as an alternative to traditional realism is van Fraassen’s constructive em-
piricism. As we have already indicated in earlier chapters, this retains the
truth-aptness of theories and acknowledges that theoretical terms may refer
but insists that we can never know whether theories are true or to what these
terms refer. Hence the appropriate epistemic attitude is not belief in truth but
acceptance as empirically adequate.5
    Horwich takes the introduction of degrees of belief as allowing us to ap-
propriate what is good from both sides, without the costs. In particular, we can
acknowledge the point that we shouldn’t blindly accept the existence of every
unobservable entity proposed by science, while allowing theories to posses
determinate truth values (and avoiding the imposition of a sharp observable-
unobservable distinction). Nevertheless, leaving aside the issue of whether the


                      From Pragmatic Realism to Structural Empiricism 165
constructive empiricist would even accept such a move, there are further im-
portant issues to be addressed concerning the application of such an approach.
   Let us begin by considering the entities involved in the pessimistic meta-
induction, focusing in particular on the two extreme ends of the spectrum.
First of all, granted that there are entities in whose existence we have a great
deal of conﬁdence-such as electrons, atoms, or even light6-there are clearly
others, such as phlogiston, caloric, and the optical and luminiferous ethers,
that have fallen by the wayside, as it were. Even the sophisticated realist with
her apparatus of degrees of belief is going to have to show that today’s sci-
entiﬁc entities are not like these in relevant ways, if the pessimistic meta-
induction is not going to bite again. She might, for example, argue that the
terms referring to these entities are somehow ‘‘idle,’’ in the sense that they do
not feature in the relevant deductions of predictions whose empirical success
leads to the theory concerned being regarded as true, approximately true, or
whatever (Kitcher 1993; Psillos 1999). In other words, they do no useful
work within the theory. An example of such a term is caloric, and it has been
argued, ‘‘The laws which scientists considered well supported by the available
evidence and the background assumptions they used in their theoretical der-
ivation were independent of the hypothesis that the cause of heat was a
material substance: no relevant assumption was essentially used in the deri-
vation-prediction of these laws’’ (Psillos 1999, p. 113).
   The problem with this suggestion is that, in order for it to work, the notion
of an ‘‘idle’’ term has to be rigidly delineated, so that any term is idle that does
not feature in such deductions. This holds realism hostage to a strongly de-
ductivist view of science. And one might well object that there are terms that
are idle in this sense but can still be regarded as useful in various ways, such
as the heuristic usefulness of a term which helps to provide the metaphysical
framework of a theory, without which the theory could never be proposed in
the ﬁrst place.7 Consider the example of caloric: The laws and predictions
referred to here include the law of conservation of heat, Carnot’s theorems,
and Laplace’s prediction of the speed of sound in air (Psillos 1999, pp. 115–
125). Even if we grant that these laws and predictions can be formally de-
tached from the assumption as to the nature of caloric (and insofar as this
nature is metaphysical, it should perhaps come as no surprise that physics
should be detachable from metaphysics in this way),8 a strong case can be
made that the proponents of these laws and predictions could not have
conceived them, much less developed and pursued them, without such an
assumption. Given our rejection of the sort of heuristics-justiﬁcation distinc-
tion to which this deductivist view is allied, we are naturally sympathetic to
this kind of objection. And here the degrees of belief mechanism might be
reintroduced: The attitude of the scientist proposing the caloric theory of heat,
say, might be appropriately captured in the differential manner indicated
previously. Here a further differentiation might be usefully introduced: Insofar
as the theoretical terms, or cluster of terms, corresponding to certain prop-
erties of ‘‘caloric’’ (and we shall address the issue of the distinction between
the entity itself and its properties shortly) feature in the relevant deductions,
and insofar as these accrue empirical success for the theory, the scientist


166   Science and Partial Truth
might have a high degree of belief in the proposition that heat has these
properties. Insofar as the notion of caloric as a material substance was nec-
essary to conceive of the theory in the ﬁrst place, the degree of belief in the
existence of such a substance will not be zero, although given the problems
the notion faced, such as that concerning the weight of caloric, this degree of
belief may not be very high.9 As we have tried to emphasize, straightforward
empirical success-as understood by the deductivist-is not the only criterion
for evaluating theories. In other words, the degrees of belief proposal ties in
quite naturally with a fallibilist view of theories in general, and we see no
reason why such a view should not be extended to current examples.
    Furthermore, the ‘‘idle terms’’ strategy will clearly not work in all cases.
Consider the case of the optical and luminiferous ethers: Here it would appear
that one can make an even stronger case that the conception of light as a
wave could not have been developed without assuming some such medium.
How is the realist to deal with science’s abandonment of these? A further
strategy is to argue that these terms in fact refer to the same ‘‘thing’’ as
certain current terms that fulﬁll the same causal role; thus, it is claimed, the
luminiferous ether performed the same causal role as the electromagnetic ﬁeld
and hence was not actually abandoned after all (Hardin and Rosenberg
1982). Now this is problematic for a number of reasons: First of all, it suggests
a historical attitude to the beliefs of proponents of the ether that seems
Whiggish in the extreme, in that it holds that when they talked of and ex-
pressed belief in the ether, they were ‘‘actually’’ talking of and expressing
belief in something they had no idea existed-namely, the electromagnetic
ﬁeld. More acutely, perhaps, the theory of reference underlying this strategy is
too liberal since, it is claimed, just about any entity, now abandoned, can be
said to have fulﬁlled the same causal role as some current entity (consider, for
example, the following sequence: the ‘‘natural place’’ of Aristotle, the
‘‘gravity’’ of Newton, and the ‘‘curved space-time’’ of Einstein; Laudan 1984).
Finally, this strategy effectively detaches reference from its theoretical context
and entails that ‘‘we can establish what a theory refers to independently of
any detailed analysis of what the theory asserts’’ (Laudan 1984, p. 161).
    One might attempt to get around the last two problems, at least, by
broadening one’s account of reference to include descriptive elements as well
as causal roles (Psillos 1999, pp. 293–300). The central idea here is that
reference is ﬁxed via a ‘‘core causal description’’ of those properties that un-
derpin the putative entity’s causal role with regard to the phenomena in
question (Psillos 1999, p. 295). The overall set of properties is signiﬁcantly
open to further developments, so that new properties get added around the
core as science progresses. Of course, some of these latter properties may
subsequently be deleted, particularly through evolutionary changes, but as
long as there is signiﬁcant overlap via the core set, continuity of reference
through scientiﬁc change can be maintained.
    In the context of this kind of framework, it begins to make more sense to
say that the term ‘‘luminiferous ether’’ referred to the electromagnetic ﬁeld
(Psillos 1999, pp. 296–299). In this case, the ‘‘core causal description’’ is
provided by two sets of properties-one kinematical, which underpins the


                     From Pragmatic Realism to Structural Empiricism 167
ﬁnite velocity of light, and one dynamical, which ensured the ether’s role as a
repository of potential and kinetic energy. Other-typically mechanical-
properties to do with the nature of the ether as a medium were associated with
particular models of the ether, and the attitude of physicists toward these, of
course, was epistemically much less robust. The core causal description was
then taken up by the electromagnetic ﬁeld, so that one can say that ‘‘the
denotations of the terms ‘ether’ and ‘ﬁeld’ were (broadly speaking) entities
which shared some fundamental properties by virtue of which they played the
causal role they were ascribed’’ (Psillos 1999, p. 296). It is then a small step to
conclude that the terms referred to the same entity. Finally, it is claimed that
this avoids the two problems posed by Laudan. First of all, not just any old
entity can fulﬁll the same causal role as the current one since there needs to
be a commonality of properties as represented by the core causal description.
Second, it is only through a detailed analysis of what a theory asserts that we
can pick out the relevant properties in the ﬁrst place; thus reference is not
detached from the theoretical context.
   To pursue this issue further would take us too far from the aim of this
chapter, but the following points are worth noting. First, there is the emphasis
on the openness of the set of properties surrounding the core, and, not sur-
prisingly, we can easily take account of this via the partial structures rep-
resentation. Those properties that constitute the core description will be
included in the R1, together with others, of course, that may be retained
through theory change. As we move through such a change, from ether-
based theories of light to Maxwell’s theory, for example, some of these ‘‘per-
ipheral’’ R1 properties will be consigned to R2. Crucially, however, the
openness in the whole process, which parallels that of the corresponding
theory, is captured by the R3, representing those properties and relations that
we, or the physicists of the time, simply do not know if they are possessed by
either the ether or the electromagnetic ﬁeld.
   Second, the various ether models mentioned played an important heuristic
role, which was based on certain positive analogies that held between the ether
and elastic solids relating, for example, to the transversal nature of light waves
(Psillos 1999, p. 131). An example of a negative analogy is represented by the
longitudinal waves that can occur in elastic solids but not in the case of light (p.
132) and, most crucially for the heuristic aspect, there existed certain neutral
analogies that powered the development of further models (pp. 135–137). The
explicit ‘‘Hessian’’ framework here (Psillos 1999, pp. 140–143) can, of course,
be straightforwardly accommodated within the partial structures approach, as
indicated in chapter 3. More interestingly for the present discussion is the
emphasis on the heuristic role of these models, which relates to our point
regarding the example of caloric. Clearly, the exploration of those features of the
ether that have subsequently come to be represented within the ‘‘core causal
description’’ could not have got off the ground in the absence of the models
whose mechanical properties come to be discarded for referential purposes. The
blurring of the heuristics-justiﬁcation distinction may lead one to wonder
whether the separation of properties-between those in the core and those
outside-can in fact be so cleanly made as this account of reference requires.


168   Science and Partial Truth
    This brings us to a related point. Let us recall the ﬁrst problem with the
causal role approach to reference-namely, that it implies that scientists of the
time were simply mistaken in their beliefs as to what the relevant terms were
referring to. Now let us examine the nature of those beliefs a little more
carefully. When scientist x expressed a belief in the existence of the ether,
the term is taken to refer to an entity possessing certain properties. Of course,
the degree of belief, not in the existence of the entity per se but in the claim
that it possesses certain properties, may ﬂuctuate over time, so that scientist x
may start off with equal degrees of belief in the ether possessing certain me-
chanical properties and dynamical ones. As time goes on, her degree of belief
that the ether possesses mechanical ones may decrease while the degree of
belief that it has the relevant dynamical ones may remain constant or even
increase.10 And, as we have indicated, our approach seems admirably suited
to capturing this sort of situation, particularly insofar as it allows us to capture
the heuristic aspects. But now if the mechanical properties are shunted off to
the models, as it were, in what sense can we still say that the scientist is
referring to the ether as an entity? The question is important because separ-
ating off the kinematical and dynamical properties from the mechanical ones
in this way may obscure precisely that which was taken to be important in the
transition from classical to relativistic physics. As well as these properties, and
in virtue of its role as an absolute frame of reference, the ether also possessed
certain ‘‘positional’’ properties (Psillos 1999, p. 314 fn. 9). If these are in-
cluded in the core, then there can be no commonality of reference with the
electromagnetic ﬁeld. However, if they are not included in the core, then the
perspective on theory change offered by this approach to reference may seem
too conservative.
    Consider another scientist (or perhaps the same one) working post-Einstein.
She now believes in the existence of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, and her degree
of belief in the possession by this ﬁeld of certain dynamical properties may be
equal to that of her colleague (or other self) who believed in the possession by
the ether of the same properties, but the object of the belief, that to which the
terms refer, appears very different as an entity. Whereas the ether was con-
ceived of as a kind of substance, possessing certain mechanical qualities and
acting as an absolute reference frame, the electromagnetic ﬁeld was not (at
least not post-Einstein). The metaphysical natures of the ether and the elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld, as entities, are clearly very different, and the claim might be
pressed that, given this difference, there is no commonality of reference.
    Now, the realist might respond that insofar as these metaphysical natures
do not feature in the relevant science, she is under no obligation to accom-
modate them in her theory of reference or her scientiﬁc realism as a whole. In
other words, she might insist that when she, as a realist, insists that the world
is as our best theories say it is, that covers the relevant scientiﬁcally grounded
properties only and not these metaphysical natures. But then one might le-
gitimately ask, what is it that is being referred to? It cannot be the ether/
electromagnetic ﬁeld as an entity, since this entityhood is cashed out in terms
of the metaphysical natures. Thus what is being referred to is only the relevant
cluster of properties that are retained through theory change. But now this


                     From Pragmatic Realism to Structural Empiricism 169
response to the pessimistic meta-induction looks very different from what we
initially took it to be. Instead of claiming that the ether was not abandoned-
when scientists referred to it they were actually referring to the electro-
magnetic ﬁeld-what is actually being claimed is that reference to the ether
was secured via a certain cluster of properties that also feature in reference to
the electromagnetic ﬁeld. Now this response to the pessimistic meta-induction
amounts to the claim that the ether as an entity was indeed abandoned, but
that certain properties were preserved and retained in subsequent theories,
where they feature in or are the subject of the relevant laws. In other words,
what this amounts to is the admission that the proponent of the meta-induction
is right in noting that the ontology of theories has changed but that she has
failed to see that certain structural aspects, as represented by the cited proper-
ties, are retained. This suggests a different kind of realism from the traditional
form-namely, ‘‘structural realism’’-which we shall return to later.
    So far we have just been addressing the issue of the apparently abandoned
terms, but what about the other end of our spectrum, where we have terms
such as ‘‘electron’’ that have survived theory change, in which we have a
high level of conﬁdence that they will be retained through future such
changes, and in whose existence we have a correspondingly high degree of
belief? Here, too, there are problems for the realist, and again they arise out of
metaphysical concerns. Consider the following question: Does the term elec-
tron as used by J. J. Thomson, for example, refer to the same entity as the term
as used in today’s quantum ﬁeld theory? Clearly, the metaphysical nature of
the electron has undergone radical change, from a classical particle, to
something that also has ‘‘wavelike’’ properties, to a particular kind of quan-
tum ﬁeld. Now the realist might respond as before by emphasizing that the
core set of properties has remained the same from Thomson’s time to today
and that in these terms we can claim to have reference to the same thing.
Setting aside, for the moment, our concerns relating to entityhood and ref-
erence, the danger here is that this may be too conservative a response to the
concerns that underlie the pessimistic meta-induction, for if we take the
wavelike nature of the quantum electron to be constituted by certain prop-
erties, then these are surely central to our current understanding of it. But, if
these are included in the ‘‘core causal description,’’ then the response col-
lapses into a form of the causal role approach and falls prey to the second
problem stated previously: If we are allowed to add to the core, then com-
monalities can be found between all kinds of apparently disparate entities,
including Aristotle’s natural place, Newton’s gravity, and Einstein’s space-
time. (The original core might be rather small and limited, but this is no
problem if we are allowed to add to it as we go along.) If these wavelike
properties are not included in the core, then we would be shifting to the
periphery what many would take to be the essential quantum aspect of the
electron. At best, this response would appear extremely conservative in
maintaining what is basically a classical core for our understanding of the
electron; at worst, it appears to deny the centrality of the very theoretical
changes that the proponent of the pessimistic meta-induction presents as a
challenge. And again, the nature of the ‘‘thing’’ that this approach to


170   Science and Partial Truth
reference suggests is that of a bundle or cluster of invariant properties only, so
the ontology of our realism has subtly changed.11
    We have already alluded, in passing, to our second issue concerning
changes in belief with regard to these existence claims. Not only is it the case
that unobservable entities come and go, as it were, but the degree of belief in
the existence of a certain entity may wax and wane in the course of scientiﬁc
development. One might start off believing very strongly in the existence of
the ether, for example, only for that belief to weaken, perhaps quite drama-
tically, with the development of Maxwell’s theory of electromagnetism and
perhaps crash to zero upon reading Einstein’s 1905 paper on Special Rel-
ativity. Of course, the kinds of factors driving these changes will be precisely
those we have touched on in this book: Some will be straightforwardly em-
pirical, and others will have to with well-grounded symmetry principles, for
example. These are the factors that drive theory change in general, and, of
course, changes in one’s degree of belief in the existence of a certain entity do
not take place in a vacuum. The conﬁdence one has in the existence of the
ether increases as the relevant theory is developed, incorporates certain
structural aspects from previous empirically successful theories, and achieves
a level of empirical success of its own. Likewise, it decreases with the devel-
opment of a new theory that does not include the term, has greater ex-
planatory power, achieves greater empirical success, and so on.
    This then relates to our third issue, whether the belief is in the relevant
proposition as true or as quasi-true only. When our scientist x expresses a
belief in the existence of the ether, is it the case that she believes, or should
believe, the proposition ‘‘the ether exists’’ to be true? Clearly, the kinds of
considerations that are expressed by the pessimistic meta-induction push one
toward a negative answer to this latter question. However, as we have just
seen, the form of fallibilism that should be maintained in the face of this
argument appears to be adequately incorporated by adopting a broadly
probabilistic approach involving degrees of belief, instead of straight belief per
se. Furthermore, the concerns that led us to adopt quasi truth and its mod-
iﬁcation within this degrees of belief approach-the problem of universal laws,
the Hacking problem, the Popper-Miller argument, and so forth-do not ap-
pear to come into play in this context. Nevertheless, we would still urge the
adoption of our framework for the simple reason that these existence claims
are never made in a vacuum; such a claim has the epistemic force that it has
only because it is made in the context of a particular theory. Any judgment as
to the existence of the ether, for example, occurs in the context of a particular
theory in which the properties of the ether are expressed and, of course,
related-via an appropriately complex web-to the relevant properties of
measuring instruments (or, at least, some of the properties of the ether are!).
To say, ‘‘I believe the ether exists’’ would be to say that ‘‘I believe there is an
entity whose properties are the following,’’ where these properties are de-
scribed within the theory. The realist issue of whether such properties are
instantiated ‘‘in the world’’ is entirely bound up with the issue of whether the
theory should be regarded as true; indeed, to say that the theory is true, on
the usual accounts, is just to say that the world contains or manifests or


                     From Pragmatic Realism to Structural Empiricism 171
whatever these properties. Existence beliefs are parasitic upon beliefs about
the truth of theories in this way.12 Hence, a shift to quasi truth for truth
claims drags with it a parallel shift for existence claims.13
   Finally, this discussion should make it quite clear that anyone advocating an
epistemic attitude of approximate or partial truth for theories need not be
committed to the absurd view that unobservable entities ‘‘approximately exist.’’
Of course, from an ontological point of view, the notion of an entity existing
only ‘‘approximately’’ does not make any sense, but the fallibilism we are
advocating here is wholly epistemic. What the quasi truth of theories motivates,
as we have indicated, is the incorporation of this notion into the degrees of belief
approach outlined previously.
   There are further issues that realism-even one modiﬁed by quasi truth-
must face, and consideration of these will lead us to the alternative side of the
debate.


   The Warrant for Realism

Why should one be a scientiﬁc realist, of whatever stripe? Before turning to the
possible answers, let’s brieﬂy consider the nature of the question itself. We
might view it as a purely philosophical question of the same kind as ‘‘Why
should one be a realist in general, as opposed to an idealist, say?’’ or, in the
context of the mind-body problem, ‘‘Why should one be a dualist?’’ Any
answer to our question would then be presumed to have the same form as the
answers to these others: One might, for example, give a kind of ‘‘transcen-
dental’’ response, along the lines of ‘‘the necessary conditions for scientiﬁc
cognition require a realist attitude.’’ Such a view of the issue has fallen out of
favor in recent years, to be replaced by a broadly ‘‘naturalistic’’ approach that
takes our question, along with all philosophical questions, to be on a par with
scientiﬁc questions in general.14 What this means is that the question of why
one should be a scientiﬁc realist is treated in just the same way and as
requiring just the same sort of answer as the question of why we should
accept theory T. The answer to the latter, it is claimed, will typically be of the
form ‘‘because T is the best explanation of the relevant phenomena,’’ and
hence the answer to our question should have the same form-namely, that of
an ‘‘inference to the best explanation’’ (IBE).
    What would be the ‘‘relevant phenomena’’ in this case? Most obviously,
perhaps, it would be the success of science itself. Thus realism is seen as
offering the best explanation of this success. The next question is ‘‘best com-
pared to what?’’ IBE is comparative, and typically theory T will be judged the
best explanation of the relevant phenomena compared with theory T0 , its
competitor. What is the competitor in the case of scientiﬁc realism? Recent
debate has been dominated by the view that the only competitor isn’t much
of a competitor at all, since it amounts to the claim that the success of
science is a kind of miracle-that is, essentially inexplicable. This then gives
us the famous ‘‘No Miracles Argument’’ (also known as ‘‘the Ultimate



172   Science and Partial Truth
Argument’’), widely regarded as powering modern scientiﬁc realism: ‘‘The
positive argument for realism is that it is the only philosophy that doesn’t make
the success of science a miracle’’ (Putnam 1975a, p. 69). Thus the No Miracles
Argument is seen as a form of IBE, and the warrant for scientiﬁc realism
inherits all the respectability of the warrant for scientiﬁc theories in general.
    This overall strategy is problematic on a number of counts. First of all, one
might argue that there are contenders to the realist explanation of the success
of science other than ‘‘it must be a miracle!’’ Van Fraassen, for example, has
offered a Darwinian alternative: ‘‘The success of science is not a miracle. It is
not even surprising to the scientiﬁc (Darwinist) mind. For any scientiﬁc theory
is born into a life of ﬁerce competition, a jungle red in tooth and claw. Only
the successful theories survive-the ones which in fact have latched on to
actual regularities in nature’’ (1980, p. 40). Now, the export of Darwinian
arguments beyond the domain of biology is always problematic. Popper fa-
mously argued that the theory of evolution as (crudely) summed up by the
slogan ‘‘survival of the ﬁttest’’ was tautologous, since ‘‘ﬁtness,’’ he claimed, is
deﬁned in terms of survival. Similar worries arise here: To insist that only
successful theories survive doesn’t explain much if success is ultimately un-
derstood in terms of ‘‘surviving’’ experimental refutation and the like. Psillos
has pursued these worries further, suggesting that we understand van
Fraassen’s account as ‘‘phenotypical,’’ in the sense that theories that are
empirically successful are regarded as having the same phenotype and are
selected on this basis (Psillos 1999, pp. 96–97). However, a realist will insist
on a ‘‘deeper,’’ genotypical explanation in terms of some further, underlying
feature that renders the theories successful in the ﬁrst place: For the realist,
this genotype will be approximate truth (Psillos 1999, pp. 96–97). The prob-
lem, of course, is that this insistence on a ‘‘deeper’’ explanation begs the
question against an antirealist like van Fraassen. In the biological case, where
the genotypical explanation is ultimately reduced to a genetic causal account,
the antirealist will either argue that the terms of this account-terms referring
to the genes and the relevant causal mechanisms-can be reduced to ob-
servation terms, if she is an old-fashioned reductionist instrumentalist, or that
belief in the existence of such entities and in the truth of the accompanying
theoretical mechanism is not appropriate, if she is a new-fashioned con-
structive empiricist, like van Fraassen. The point of such antirealist positions
is precisely to resist accepting as true ‘‘deeper’’ explanations of scientiﬁc
phenomena, and hence they will see no reason to accept them with regard to
the success of science itself.
    This accusation of question-begging can then be leveled at the realist
strategy as a whole. If the antirealist is not prepared to accept inference to the
best explanation at the level of scientiﬁc methodology-where the ‘‘best’’ is
understood as ‘‘most approximately true’’-then why should she accept it as
an appropriate warrant at the level of the philosophy of science? From this
perspective, there appears to be a vicious circularity at the heart of the whole
realist strategy, since it employs ‘‘the very type of argument whose cogency is
the question under discussion’’ (Fine 1991, p. 82).



                     From Pragmatic Realism to Structural Empiricism 173
   One response to such accusations is to admit that the strategy is circular
but insist that it is not viciously so. The idea is as follows (Psillos 1999, pp.
81–90). Consider again the No Miracles Argument in the following form:
   Premise: Theories accepted on the basis of IBE are empirically successful.
   Conclusion: The best explanation of this success is that the theories
   are approximately true.
IBE is used to move from the premise to a conclusion that says something
about IBE itself, but it is not the case that this conclusion is assumed in the
premise. Thus the No Miracles Argument is only ‘‘rule-circular’’ and not,
crucially, ‘‘premise-circular.’’ Hence, Psillos concludes, the defender of the No
Miracles Argument is, at least, no worse off than the defenders of induction and
deduction who employ similar strategies (1999, p. 89).
    This is an interesting and well-worked-out response (for criticisms, see
Douven 2001, and for a reply, see Psillos 2001), but it is not clear to us that
the realist can be placed alongside the defenders of deduction and induction
quite so straightforwardly. First of all, suppose we were to accept that a
justiﬁcation of IBE that itself employs a form of IBE is unavoidable. Still, one
might argue that this still falls short of a justiﬁcation of realism: To get there,
one has to read ‘‘best explanation’’ as ‘‘approximately true explanation.’’
Couldn’t one be an antirealist, acknowledge that theories are accepted-not
as approximately true, of course-on the basis of IBE, and acknowledge that
IBE can be justiﬁed only by employing IBE but conclude that the ‘‘best ex-
planation’’ of the success of the theories that are accepted lies not with their
approximate truth but with some other virtue? Fine, for example, has sug-
gested that ‘‘instrumental reliability’’ can be regarded as the best explanation
of the success of science (1986, pp. 153–154), where this is better than
approximate truth on the grounds that the former is less inﬂationary than the
latter and therefore should be preferred. Now, setting aside the question of
whether this itself begs the question against realism, Fine himself has a rather
peculiar attitude toward truth. He accuses the realist of positing an ‘‘extra-
theoretical relation between theories and the world’’ (1996, p. 24)-namely,
the relation of approximate truth. And here is how the circularity arises for
Fine: ‘‘Thus, to address doubts over the reality of relations posited by ex-
planatory hypotheses, the realist proceeds to introduce a further explanatory
hypothesis (realism), itself positing such a relation (approximate truth)’’ (Fine
1996, p. 24).
    What’s going on here is that Fine thinks the realist who adopts the cor-
respondence theory of truth is committed to truth being a natural kind, in the
sense that one would know the ‘‘essence of truth.’’ But, as Musgrave points
out (1996), the lesson we should learn from Tarski is that there is no such
essence, since truths are many and various, and so are the ways they ‘‘cor-
respond’’ to the facts. What Tarski’s theory does is capture the correspon-
dence relation as best it can be captured. Fine thinks the realist is committed
to going beyond Tarski to the essence of truth, and this is what generates the
circularity. No, insists Musgrave, a realist does not have to accept an essen-
tialist view of truth; she can be happy enough with as much correspondence


174   Science and Partial Truth
as Tarski gives. Hence it is debatable whether approximate truth is more
inﬂationary than instrumental reliability (see also Psillos 1999, pp. 91–93).
    There is the further issue of whether ‘‘instrumental reliability’’ is any ex-
planation at all. To say that a theory is instrumentally reliable is to say that it
is good at making predictions, accounting for the phenomena, in short, that it
is empirically successful. At this level, instrumental reliability is not put for-
ward by the antirealist as an explanation of the empirical success of the
theory, since she doesn’t see the latter as requiring any kind of explanation.
Likewise, at the metalevel, to explain the success of science in terms of the
instrumental reliability of theories is not to offer an explanation at all (Psillos
1999, pp. 92–93). Fine himself seems to have realized this, offering a new
interpretation of instrumental reliability in terms of the disposition to produce
empirical success (1991), but this smacks of desperation. As Psillos notes,
either such dispositions must be taken as ‘‘brute facts,’’ as it were, in which
case they remain mysterious, or else they must be grounded in some
nondispositional property (such as approximate truth; Psillos 1999, p. 93). At
this point, the antirealist-and we must recall that Fine himself is not such but
is trying to construct a ‘‘third way’’ with his ‘‘Natural Ontological Attitude’’-
might stand up and insist that we just shouldn’t be playing this sort of game
in the ﬁrst place! Once we begin to offer explanations of the success of science,
we have already bought into the ‘‘explanationist strategy’’ and conceded too
much to the realist. An ‘‘honest’’ antirealism would reject the entire strategy
to begin with and insist that no explanations are to be had-or at least not of
the form the realist apparently wants (the closest the antirealist is willing to
get would be van Fraassen’s Darwinian line, touched on previously). What
begins to emerge here is how difﬁcult it is for either side to get their argument
off the ground without begging questions against the other.15 And this is
because the very epistemological bases of the two positions are so very dif-
ferent (see, for example, Wylie 1986 for a nice account of the way the two
sides dance around each other without properly engaging).
    This discussion also begins to indicate why the realist, in defending an
‘‘inference-to-the-best-explanation’’ justiﬁcation of IBE is worse off than either
the inductivist or deductivist. Unlike the latter, she can get the justiﬁcation
going only by begging certain fundamental epistemological questions against
the antirealist. Consider what IBE is supposed to lead us to: At the ‘‘object’’
level, the inference leads us to the (approximate) truth of the given theory; at
the metalevel it is supposed to lead us to the (approximate?) truth of realism,
but at this point all sorts of doubts come crashing in. First of all, on this
account, theories are put forward as explanations of the phenomena, and
realism is analogously put forward as an explanation of the success of these
theories in explaining the phenomena. The question arises: Can the success of
science itself be appropriately treated as a phenomenon to be explained in an
analogous way to ‘‘natural’’ phenomena? The realist’s positive response to
this question takes her along a curious path. Consider again Fine’s suggestion
that the best explanation should be one involving instrumental reliability
rather than truth. Consistency would appear to demand that at the metalevel,
if his form of instrumentalism is accepted as the ‘‘best’’ explanation of the


                     From Pragmatic Realism to Structural Empiricism 175
success of science, ‘‘best’’ should not be equated with truth but rather with
‘‘instrumental reliability’’ or ‘‘empirical adequacy’’ (Psillos 1999, pp. 90–91).
But this is bizarre: In what sense can instrumentalism be understood as em-
pirically adequate to the ‘‘phenomenon’’ in this case? In the case of a theory,
the sense is clear, particularly through van Fraassen’s model-theoretic for-
mulation. But are we supposed to think of the success of science being rep-
resented by a data model that is then embedded into instrumentalism? If we
are, then presumably we should be able to judge the ‘‘goodness of ﬁt’’ but in
what terms? Do we move to the meta-metalevel and argue about realist versus
instrumentalist views of the relationship between realist and instrumentalist
views of science and the phenomena of the success of science? We seem to
have avoided circularity but only at the expense of a particularly unattractive
regress.16
    Second, in the case of ‘‘natural’’ phenomena, the use of the plural is sig-
niﬁcant. In the case of the success of science, that’s all there is, so we have
only a phenomenon. This is important because the relationship in this case
can be only vertical and not horizontal, synchronic and not diachronic, so
there is no dynamic aspect. What this means is that realism, instrumentalism,
or any other putative explanation of the success of science cannot be in-
dependently testable (Worrall 1996, pp. 141–142; see also Almeder 1987, pp.
67–71). Here is another difference between the explanations offered by the-
ories and the ‘‘explanations’’ offered by philosophical positions: Independent
testability is crucial for the former to be acceptable, but this requires there to
be phenomena,17 rather than just a phenomenon. Similarly, novel predictions
play an important role in judging the empirical success of theories, but it is
difﬁcult to see how there could be any such predictions in the case of either
realism or instrumentalism. One could continue: ‘‘Natural’’ phenomena are
typically not just observed but are created under certain conditions (Hacking
1983); that obviously does not apply to the success of science. There is,
related to this, a whole ‘‘epistemology of experiment,’’ but again, that ﬁnds no
purchase at the metalevel.
    The realist will fall back to the view that the relevant relationship here is
only meant to be analogous to that which holds between theories and the
phenomena. However, in that case the analogy seems utterly mysterious and
obscure, and the realist owes us an account of how this ‘‘analogy’’ can yet
support the same form of inference-IBE-and also a judgment as to the
‘‘truth’’ of realism. This brings us to our ﬁnal point regarding this strategy:
The conclusion of the inference at the object level is that the theory is true, or
at least approximately so. What is the inference at the metalevel supposed to
show? That scientiﬁc realism itself is ‘‘true?’’ But what theory of truth is
supposed to apply here? If the realist, still pursuing the strategy, insists that it
is truth in the correspondence sense that she means, then to what is realism
itself supposed to correspond? In the case of a theory, we can at least grasp the
notion that the theory is supposed to be true in the sense of corresponding to
‘‘the world,’’ where this includes both observable and unobservable aspects.
In the case of realism itself, there is, again, only the success of science; if this is
regarded as ‘‘observable’’ (perhaps via the ‘‘instrumentation’’ of the history of


176    Science and Partial Truth
science!), then there is no unobservable aspect. But then, turning the tables
on the realist, ‘‘truth’’ at this level collapses into ‘‘empirical adequacy’’ (as-
suming we can make sense of the latter in this context). And if it is not
correspondence truth that is meant, then, ﬁrst of all the realist owes us an
account of what ‘‘truth’’ is supposed to mean in this context; second, it is hard
to see how any such alternative account could fail to undermine the overall
strategy itself (since we would have IBE leading to truth at one level and IBE
leading to something else at another).
    Perhaps it is time to call a halt to these proceedings. The realist’s ‘‘ex-
planationist’’ strategy is beginning to look fatally ﬂawed, and insofar as it is,
one might also begin to have doubts about the overall ‘‘naturalistic’’ per-
spective on which it is based.18 Does this mean realism itself is fatally
ﬂawed? After noting that realism is not independently testable, Worrall
concludes, ‘‘Scientiﬁc realism can surely not be inferred in any interesting
sense from science’s success. The ‘no miracles’ argument cannot establish
scientiﬁc realism; the claim is only that, other things being equal, a theory’s
predictive success supplies a prima-facie plausibility argument in favour of its
somehow or other having latched on to the truth’’ (1996, p. 142). But a
plausibility argument is not a warrant, and the ‘‘psychological force’’
(Worrall 1996, p. 142) of the argument will not sway the antirealist in the
least.
    Alternatively, we might try to ﬁnd some other warrant for realism. Of
particular interest to us is Hacking’s attempt to bypass IBE entirely by offering
essentially ‘‘pragmatic’’ grounds for accepting the existence of certain entities:
If we can use these entities as tools to create further phenomena, then we
have grounds for believing they exist (Hacking 1983). The example he gives is
that of a ‘‘spray’’ of positrons being used in an experiment to alter the charge
on a niobium ball; hence his now-famous slogan ‘‘if you can spray ’em, they
exist.’’ This forms the basis of his ‘‘entity realism,’’ in which the grounds for
accepting the existence of unobservable entities are not theory-based but
rather practice-based. The contexts into which this can be nested are, ﬁrst, a
view of scientiﬁc knowledge according to which such knowledge has to do
with intervening in the world, as well as representing it, and second, Dewey’s
‘‘transformational’’ pragmatism. For our purposes, the crucial difference be-
tween Dewey’s approach and Peirce’s is the following: The latter focused on
the ﬁxation of belief and can hence be viewed as primarily theory oriented,
whereas Dewey ‘‘was concerned chieﬂy with the instrumental function of the
inquiring intelligence in transforming the problematic situation so as to
achieve a satisfactory outcome’’ (Smith 1978, p. 97; his emphasis). The dif-
ference in focus reﬂects on a different attitude toward truth: Whereas Peirce
advocated the view we’ve outlined in chapter 1, with truth reached as an
ideal limit, Dewey ‘‘was led to set that ideal aside in favour of a transform
theory which requires that the indeterminate or problematic situation which
ﬁrst gives rise to inquiry be replaced by a determinate state of affairs wherein
the problem is resolved, not merely by answering a theoretical question but by
actual manipulation and control of the relevant objects and conditions in-
volved’’ (Smith 1978, p. 98).


                     From Pragmatic Realism to Structural Empiricism 177
    Situating ‘‘entity realism’’ in this broader pragmatist framework renders it
both more interesting than it might at ﬁrst appear and also more problematic.
Let us consider the argument for this view in slightly more detail: Regarding
electrons, Hacking maintains that there is no one single theory of the electron
that can be viewed as the ‘‘best explanation’’ of the phenomena. Rather, there
is a disparate set of models with, he insists, no common core. Various of these
models-many of them ‘‘low level’’ or phenomenological, rather than
‘‘theoretical’’-are then drawn upon in order to construct instruments, such
as an electron gun, which are then used to create new phenomena. The claim,
then, is that the belief in the existence of electrons arises, not from some
theoretical inference, but as the result of having to use them, as a tool, to
intervene in and change the world. In addition, Hacking makes the historical
assertion that it was on just such grounds that physicists came to believe in
electrons at the turn of the century.
    However, underlying his claim is a form of inference that slides from the
observable to the unobservable: The idea seems to be that, just as someone
who uses a spanner to ‘‘intervene’’ in her car engine cannot doubt the ex-
istence of the spanner in the using of it (or, at least, not in some nonidealist
sense), so the physicist cannot doubt the existence of the electrons that she
effectively takes down off the shelf in the form of an electron gun, say. Now,
the antirealist will obviously respond that the two cases are strikingly dif-
ferent, concerning the observable and the unobservable, respectively. The
evidence for the existence of the spanner comes not just-or not at all-from
its use but from its observability via different means, such as sight and touch,
whereas there is no such directly observable evidence for the existence of
electrons. This brings us back to the contentious issue of the observable-
unobservable distinction, touched upon in chapter 4, and Hacking does have
a response that emphasizes the manner in which what are ‘‘observable’’ and
‘‘unobservable’’ lie at different ends of a spectrum, rather than on different
sides of an epistemological divide. The response is twofold: First, Hacking
notes that instruments that function on different physical bases-different
kinds of microscopes, say-appear to reveal the same phenomena. Although
these phenomena are unobservable to human senses, nevertheless, the sim-
ilarities between what these different kinds of instruments ‘‘observe’’ sup-
port the idea that what is being ‘‘observed’’ exists. Second, he appeals
explicitly to the way the macroscopic shades over into the microscopic by
using as an example the preparation of designs for complex diffraction
gratings at the macroscopic level; these designs are then shrunk down and
etched onto the appropriate materials at the microscopic level. That these
gratings then function in the manner for which they were designed is then
supposed to show that there is no sharp division between the macro and the
micro.
    It should come as no surprise that unpacking these claims and their jus-
tiﬁcations reveals a number of problematic features (see, for example, van
Fraassen 1985a). However, even if we were to grant the point concerning the
relationship between the observable and the unobservable, Hacking’s position
must still face difﬁculties. In using a spanner, to produce a torque and thereby


178   Science and Partial Truth
remove a nut, we rely on certain causal properties it can be said to possess.
The same goes for electrons, or so it has been argued: What physicists
and engineers are actually relying upon when they build an electron gun
is their knowledge of the causal properties of the electrons (Hacking 1983,
p. 265). Their existence is actually inferred from these-or, rather, from the
low-level theory or model representing these bodies (Reiner and Pearson
1995).
    Now Hacking could still resist this low-level representational move by in-
sisting, again, that scientiﬁc knowledge is gained not just from representation
but also from intervening in the world, as Dewey argued. However, the latter’s
‘‘transformational’’ epistemology threatens to undermine the robust response
to antirealism that entity realism apparently represented. As indicated in the
previous quote, Dewey rejected the underlying assumption of a representa-
tional approach-namely, that ‘‘situations’’ are always determinate. Rather,
the situations themselves, and not just our representations, are in-
determinate.19 When doubts arise, it is not merely a matter of adjusting our
beliefs but of actually intervening in the situation and thereby transforming it
into a determinate state of affairs. The worry, of course, is that the notion of
situations that are transformed from indeterminacy to determinacy through
our intervention hardly seems to sit well with scientiﬁc realism. Indeed,
Dewey’s contention that both the ‘‘facts’’ and our conceptual apparatus play
an ‘‘operational’’ role suggest a similarity with Kantian views, according to
which ‘‘the world,’’ as that which can be known, is not wholly independent of
the knowing mind. Hence, if Hacking intends his view of knowledge-via-
intervention to be understood in something akin to Dewey’s sense, then such
interventions, in rendering problematic situations determinate, render ‘‘the
world’’ dependent on us.
    The program of seeking a non-question-begging, unproblematic warrant
for realism looks to be in trouble. Perhaps the source of the difﬁculty is the
very assumption that realism-or antirealism for that matter-is the sort of
thing that can be warranted, either in the way (realists claim) theories are
warranted, via IBE, or, broadly speaking, pragmatically, the way our belief
in the existence in spanners is. This is not to say that arguments cannot be
given for these philosophical positions, but any such argument will proceed
from certain fundamental premises that the opponents of the view con-
cerned will ﬁnd contentious (Wylie 1986). Perhaps these positions should
be stripped of any resemblance to scientiﬁc theories by regarding them as
no more than ‘‘attitudes’’ that one will adopt according to whether the
relevant premises match one’s basic philosophical prejudices: If one thinks
that one’s beliefs should run deep, in the sense of extending beyond what
can be observed with the senses, then one will be inclined toward realism;
if, on the other hand, one thinks that one should not be proﬂigate with
one’s beliefs, reserving them for only those cases or situations that rep-
resent an appropriately high level of epistemic security, then one will tend
toward antirealism. Is there any way of mediating between these two
poles? At this point, it might be worth applying a pragmatic approach to
the debate itself.


                    From Pragmatic Realism to Structural Empiricism 179
   The Nature of Doubt in This Debate

Perhaps talk of realism being ‘‘true’’ or antirealism being empirically ade-
quate should be taken as a mere façon de parler at best. But then what is the
appropriate epistemic attitude? Let us consider the nature of the inquiry: At
the level of theories, inquiry begins with a problem situation, about which
doubts arise, and these doubts are resolved, according to Peirce, for example,
through the ‘‘ﬁxing’’ of belief (Peirce 1940, p. 10).20 Doubt is to be under-
stood here as the absence of belief, leading to the contrary of the states of
mind that belief produces; that is, doubt gives rise to anxiety and uneasiness.
However, doubt itself is not fundamental, arising as it does from practice.
Again, the nature of its production is deﬁned in terms of its opposite number,
belief. Since beliefs, for Peirce, are deﬁned by ‘‘the actions they generate,
doubt as the absence of belief, arises when actions are halted, impeded or
prevented in some way’’ (1940, p. 29). Thus doubt is tied to the prevention
of activity. In responding to doubt, we therefore attempt to establish those
beliefs we need to continue our activity, where such attempts constitute
inquiry.
    Hence, skeptical doubts for Peirce are not ‘‘genuine’’ doubts, since they do
not halt, impede, or otherwise prevent practical activity. And it is precisely
because of this that they cannot be resolved. For Peirce, the self-perpetuating
nature of the infamous skeptical argument that runs throughout the history
of philosophy can be situated in the distancing of its essential core of doubt
from practical activity (Alcoff 1986).21 Skeptical doubts are therefore ‘‘paper
doubts,’’ because of their very nature in lying at such a remove from practical
activity. At the level of the realism-antirealism debate, it is these sorts of doubts
that arise and cannot be resolved, at least not without begging the very
questions at issue.22
    Instrumentalist and empiricist doubts-about whether theoretical terms
genuinely refer and theories themselves can be regarded as true-are essen-
tially skeptical doubts, albeit of a restricted kind (see French 1988). As such,
they are not ‘‘genuine’’ because they do not halt or prevent practical activ-
ity-in particular, scientiﬁc activity-and are hence not resolvable. We recall
the empiricist’s invocation of the empirical underdetermination of theories
(which we shall discuss in detail later): There is no procedure to resolve the
empiricist’s doubt because any argument we might offer in defense of the
claim that a particular theory really does reﬂect the way the world is would be
subject to the empiricist’s counterargument that a variety of alternative ex-
planations can be offered that accommodate the same evidence (French
1989a). Thus, by analogy with the skeptic’s argument, the empiricist says
that all our available evidence is entirely consistent with any number of
alternative explanations and therefore there is simply nothing we can offer in
terms of the ‘‘practical’’ scientiﬁc activity of theory production that can refute
this position (cf. Alcoff 1986, p. 9).
    However, this does not leave the ﬁeld clear for the realist. As we have seen,
she is unable to offer any non-question-begging warrant for her position and
errs precisely in regarding it as true in the same sense as the theories she


180   Science and Partial Truth
interprets. Can a broadly pragmatist approach help? Peirce’s philosophy was
famously closer to realism than that of James or Dewey, but his ‘‘proof’’ of the
evidence of ‘‘reals’’-dropping a piece of chalk-is clearly insufﬁcient. Actually,
what this episode demonstrates is how careful one must be both in drawing
on these earlier views and in projecting one’s current concerns upon them.
Peirce was not at all concerned with the realist-antirealist debate in anything
like its current incarnation. What he was trying to demonstrate was the
existence of something that affects our senses and thus acts as an external
constraint on our inquiry (see Rescher 1978, pp. 19–21). Thus all he was
trying to ‘‘prove’’ was the existence of a mind-independent world.23 Of course,
this is a central plank of realist belief, but it is one that the constructive
empiricist would also accept, with, of course, the crucial proviso that we
cannot know how this mind-independent world is. Furthermore, circularity
arises even in Peirce’s account: As is well known, Peirce took the scientiﬁc
method to be superior to other methods of ‘‘ﬁxing’’ belief, and he also took it to
rest on the fundamental hypothesis that there exist ‘‘real things’’ that are
governed by laws. However, he also argued that the repeated application of
this method would alter people’s ‘‘commonsensical’’ beliefs and reveal the
nature of these ‘‘real things.’’
    Peirce’s attempts to evade this circularity are not particularly convincing
(Smith 1978, pp. 30–31). Perhaps his best effort lies with the admission that
although the scientiﬁc method cannot prove there are ‘‘reals,’’ at least it does
not prove the opposite. Hence the method and the hypothesis of ‘‘reals’’ are
harmonious in a way that other methods are not, and so no doubts can arise
from employing it.24 Needless to say, the antirealist will ﬁnd this utterly
unconvincing. In particular, as indicated before, the constructive empiricist
would simply acknowledge this hypothesis but offer an empiricist construal of
our epistemic situation with regard to both the reals and the laws they
‘‘obey.’’25
    Our constructive empiricist friend might be more comfortable with James,
who situated pragmatism within the history of (British) empiricism. James
also differed from Peirce in placing a greater emphasis on pragmatism as a
method for resolving metaphysical disputes (1907a, p. 45). The idea is as
follows: Given a disagreement between two metaphysical views, we ask,
‘‘What difference would it practically make to anyone if this notion rather
than that notion were true?’’ (James 1907a, p. 45). If no such difference can
be found, then no genuine differences exist, and the dispute is merely verbal.
Used in this way, James claims, pragmatism can resolve a cluster of traditional
disputes: between monism and pluralism, determinism and free will, materi-
alism and spiritualism.
    There are obvious difﬁculties with this application of pragmatism, partic-
ularly in the present context. First of all, what is the sense of ‘‘truth’’ here?
Presumably, the monist will want to argue that her view of the world is true
in the correspondence sense, yet James himself held a different theory of
truth, of course. If it is the latter that he means, then the monist will respond
that rather than taking the disputed positions in their own terms, James is
simply imposing a further view via the application of the pragmatist theory of


                     From Pragmatic Realism to Structural Empiricism 181
truth. This objection carries particular force in the case of the realist-
antirealist debate, where, as we have seen, the realist may insist on the
correspondence theory, even for her realism. If, on the other hand, James
acknowledges that ‘‘truth’’ should be understood in the disputants’ own
terms, then the (old style) instrumentalist would reject correspondence truth
entirely. However, if the realist’s opponent is the (new style) constructive
empiricist, then the dispute is no longer metaphysical-in the sense that both
sides agree there is a mind-independent world and that scientiﬁc theories are
truth-apt-but has become epistemological. And in this case, it is not clear
how the debate can even be set up in such a way that the pragmatic method
is applicable.
    Second, supposing that we are able to set up the debate appropriately, how
is the notion of difference to be spelled out here? What are the differences that
count? (See the discussion in Smith 1978, pp. 35–44.) And who are these
differences supposed to count for? Does it make a difference to the scientists
themselves whether they adopt a realist attitude or not? One might plausibly
claim that adopting such an attitude makes sound methodological sense in
that it encourages scientists to propose and test hypotheses about un-
observables. However, there are numerous representatives of various forms of
antirealism among the scientiﬁc community, and it is not clear that their
philosophical view hindered their scientiﬁc work in any way. More important,
insisting on realism as a methodological doctrine will not impress the con-
structive empiricist, who will simply agree to its adoption with the proviso
that the appropriate attitude be understood in ‘‘as if’’ terms; that is, scientists
should conduct their work ‘‘as if’’ there were unobservable entities. Of course,
this does not provide any warrant for realism itself.
    What about philosophers of science? If we set aside possible differences at
the scientiﬁc level, does the adoption of either realism or antirealism make any
differences at the philosophical level? Well, James refers to ‘‘practical’’ differ-
ences, and here it is hard to see any. Whether one is a realist or an antirealist
doesn’t seem to make any great difference to one’s everyday activities, to
‘‘negotiating’’ one’s way around the world! Of course, both the realist and the
antirealist will insist that it obviously makes a philosophical difference, but it is
precisely because they disagree as to what are the important philosophical
differences that accusations of question begging arise. Although it might seem
that a more ‘‘pragmatic’’ approach could help, we should be cautious. James
took the ‘‘practical’’ differences referred to previously to include differences as
to how one should conduct one’s life, and in this sense, he argued, it does
make a difference whether one believes in free will or determinism: The latter
will leave you with a sense of hopelessness and oppression, whereas the for-
mer generates hope and, of course, a sense of freedom. Now, advocating
realism on the grounds that it will make you feel better is not going to impress
anyone, least of all the constructive empiricist (who might in turn respond
that her position will make you feel better because you won’t be carrying
around all that unnecessary metaphysical baggage)!
    Perhaps, then, we should just quietly leave James’s understanding of what
constitutes a difference and return to the basic point, that the doubts that


182   Science and Partial Truth
seem to have arisen in this debate are not resolvable, precisely because, unlike
the case of science, there is no agreement as to the very nature of the
framework in which they might be resolved. Let us be clear here: What we are
claiming are unresolvable are not doubts about how the world is but rather
doubts as to whether the latter should even be taken as an appropriate aim for
science. Once one has chosen what one takes for this aim, then one can begin
the process of doubt resolution at the appropriate level. So, if one adopts a
realist perspective, then the question as to how the world is will come to be
seen as not only meaningful but also answerable (at least to a certain extent;
as we shall see, depending on what is taken to constitute an answer to this
question, certain aspects may remain beyond the reach of an evidentially
based answer). However, the point is that the form of enquiry that may be
appropriate for answering this question is not appropriate for dealing with
that of why one should be a realist in the ﬁrst place.26
    Having adopted the appropriate perspective, there is still the question as to
which form of realism or antirealism best ﬁts what one takes-within the
chosen framework-to be the relevant aspects of scientiﬁc practice. Here
again, the epistemological and metaphysical features of ‘‘standard’’ realism let
it down.


   A Pragmatist Epistemology

Let us be blunt: The realist is hamstrung by the metaphysical aspects of truth
as correspondence. These leave her vulnerable to the skeptical challenge: How
do you know when you have attained the truth in this sense? The realist’s
response that she knows she has attained ‘‘the truth,’’ or something close to
it-supposing we can introduce an appropriate metric in this context-when
she has the best possible theory available then generates the further question:
What reason does she have to believe that the theory she judges to be the
‘‘best’’ is closer to the truth than those theories that fall short? What is going
on behind this skeptical demand for such a reason is the following: Either this
reason is grounded on the epistemic virtues of the theory concerned, or it is
not. If it is so grounded, then the realist falls prey to what has been called ‘‘the
argument from the bad lot’’ (also known as the ‘‘argument from under-
consideration’’; see Lipton 1996); if it is not, then the grounds obviously need
spelling out. If it is accepted that we do not have independent access to the
world to which our theories supposedly correspond, then the prospects for
such a spelling out look dim. Hence the realist must face the argument from
the bad lot.
    The argument runs as follows: Let us accept that theories can be ranked, so
that the realist can claim that one is the ‘‘best.’’ To go beyond such a
comparative ranking, the realist must then equate the best, in this sense,
with being closer to the truth. But this requires the prior belief that the
truth is already more likely to be found in the set of theories that we are
faced with (van Fraassen 1989, pp. 142–143). In other words, to claim
that the best of the lot is the closest to the truth of the lot, we have to


                     From Pragmatic Realism to Structural Empiricism 183
assume that the lot as a whole is close to the truth to begin with. What reason
might we have to doubt this? Well, the set of theories we are faced with is, of
course, historically given, and history could have given us, as it were, a
different set.
    A possible realist response is to claim that if it is agreed that theories can be
ranked, then it is of the nature of the ranking process that the set of theories
under consideration cannot be far from the truth, and hence the gap between
the comparative and absolute evaluation can be closed. What is it about the
ranking process that can effect this closure? Here the realist appeals to sci-
entiﬁc practice and notes that ‘‘scientists rank new theories with the help of
background theories’’ (Lipton 1996, p. 100; see also Psillos 1999, pp. 215–
222). It is then argued that for this ranking to be ‘‘reliable,’’ these background
theories must be approximately true; otherwise, the ranking could be skewed
and not reliable at all. But then, of course, the background theories them-
selves were previously accepted as the ‘‘best’’ of a ranked lot of theories, and
this earlier ranking was peformed relative to a further set of background
theories, and so the iteration goes. The conclusion is that ‘‘if scientists are
highly reliable rankers . . . the highest ranked theories have to be absolutely
probable, not just more probable than the competition’’ (Lipton 1996, pp.
100–101). Hence, the truth can’t be ‘‘out there’’ beyond the set of theories
considered, and the argument from the bad lot ‘‘self-destructs’’ (Lipton 1996,
pp. 100–101).
    There are two points to note about this response. The ﬁrst is that no details
are given regarding the relationship between the theories under consideration
and the background theories. Perhaps, it might be said, no further details are
required since all that is needed for the purposes of the argument is that the
background theories are approximately true. Nevertheless, until it is speciﬁed
how background theories have an impact on the theories being ranked-
presumably in a differential manner-the proposal, while appearing plausible,
remains vague. We shall return to this issue in the context of a further anti-
realist argument-namely, the argument from underdetermination. The sec-
ond point is more important. The skeptical antirealist may feel uneasy at this
apparent proof that the best of a lot of theories is also the closest to the truth of
that lot because it seems to have solved the metaphysical issue by appeal to
epistemology. The sense of unease may have to do with the way in which the
concession that scientists are able to rank theories, in order to determine
which is the ‘‘best,’’ is rendered as the claim that scientists are reliable little
rankers. ‘‘Reliability,’’ here, is taken to mean always being able to rank a more
probable theory ahead of its competitors (Lipton 1996, p. 93). Now suppose a
scientist were unreliable; presumably that would mean she would sometimes
rank less probable theories ahead of the more probable. But this implies that
the judgment of how probable a theory is remains independent of its ranking.
Yet the whole point of the argument from the bad lot is that we cannot go
beyond the ranking of theories to reach any further, independently based
judgment. If the realist were to respond that scientists are, by and large,
reliable, the antirealist may ask, how do we know this? We know that they
rank their theories and choose the best-that much is granted-but we don’t


184   Science and Partial Truth
know whether they can do this reliably, in the sense of always ranking as the
best the theory most likely to be true.
    Let us put the point another way: If it is possible for the scientist not to be a
reliable ranker, then it must be possible for a theory to be ranked the best yet
not be the most likely to be true. In that case, factors other than those em-
ployed in the ranking must come into play in order to determine which is the
most likely to be true; that is, these factors must establish the ranking as
reliable. But there are no such factors. If it is not possible for the ranking to be
unreliable, then the best theory is ipso facto the most likely to be true, ac-
cording to the realist. But now, likelihood of being true is judged relative to the
background theories, since that is how the ranking proceeds. Likewise, the
best of these background theories are taken to be most likely to be true, and so
we iterate our way backward. But now there is nothing to prevent the back-
ground theories from skewing the ranking, and nothing to prevent their
background theories from skewing their ranking, and so on. In other words, the
whole of science might have got off on the wrong foot at the beginning of the
whole process. It seems that the skeptical challenge cannot be resisted so easily.
    The skeptic can get her foot in the door, as it were, only because of the gap
between metaphysics and epistemology allowed by standard realism. If this
gap were to be closed, then the previous argument would not even get off the
ground. This is what pragmatism does, of course, by effectively rendering truth
epistemological: If what is true is tied to our methods of inquiry, then, of
course, those methods will give us the truth! There is then no question as to
whether the sorts of epistemic values that come into play when scientists rank
theories will lead to the truth or not. As Ellis puts it: ‘‘Our epistemic values
must be adapted to the end of discovering what is true, because truth is just the
culmination of the process of investigating and reasoning about nature in
accordance with these values’’ (1996, p. 189). Of course, the antirealist may
complain that this victory over skepticism is too cheap, and the standard
realist may, equally, complain that it is too expensive. It is too cheap because it
effectively deﬁnes away the problem, and it is too expensive because it ties our
understanding of how the world is too tightly to our epistemic values. The
response of the pragmatic realist to these complaints is ultimately the same:
The antirealist is essentially correct in her counterfactual claim that the his-
tory of science could have been otherwise but only if we had been otherwise,
and the realist is essentially correct in that how the world is for the pragmatic
realist is how the world is for us, but this does not make the world dependent
upon us. The idea is that if we were beings with a different set of epistemic
values, then the theories we would rank as the best and hence as the more
approximately true would be very different from the one we currently favor. In
this sense, the antirealist is correct in suggesting there may be other theories
‘‘out there,’’ as it were. If we had these other epistemic values, then these
theories would be pragmatically true for us. And the way the world is, ac-
cording to these theories, would be the way it is for us, as such beings. This is
not to say that there is no mind-independent world (Ellis 1996, pp. 190–192).
The point of Peirce’s demonstration with the chalk is that we cannot will the
chalk to fall upward, any more than we can will heavier bodies to fall faster


                     From Pragmatic Realism to Structural Empiricism 185
than lighter ones or will electrons to hit one part of a scintillation screen rather
than another. The pragmatic realist accepts that there is a world independent
from us-and to that degree, she accepts what is common to both the standard
realist and the constructive empiricist-but denies that we can know how that
world is independently from our epistemic values.27 According to Ellis, ‘‘we
can explain anything that can be explained about our knowledge of
reality . . . without supposing that there is any way that the world is absolutely.
It is enough if there is a way (for us) that the world is for us’’ (1996, p. 192).
    Of course, how that world is for us is a further issue. Even those who agree
with the epistemology underlying standard realism may disagree with the sort
of ontological picture it appears to favor. Here, too, partial structures have
been put to use.


   Structural Realism

Let us recall the problem of ontological change in the history of science, as
encapsulated by the pessimistic meta-induction and also the inadequacies of
‘‘standard’’ realist attempts to deal with it. As we saw in the discussion of
reference and theory change, the realist seems pushed toward the view that
what is retained through such changes are the relevant structures.28 This
constitutes the heart of Worrall’s attempt to defuse the pessimistic meta-
induction by insisting that, with regard to these shifts in ontology, ‘‘there was
continuity or accumulation in the shift, but the continuity is one of form or
structure, not of content’’ (Worrall 1996, p. 157).29 This forms the basis of his
‘‘epistemic’’ form of ‘‘structural realism,’’ which maintains that all that we
know relates to theoretical structure, whereas the content of our theories
remains hidden to us. This raises two fundamental questions:
   1. How are we to appropriately characterize this structure?
   2. How are we to characterize content?
We shall brieﬂy consider each in turn.
    The principal historical example that Worrall draws upon is the theory of
light, where we see a succession of shifts from a view of light as corpuscles, to
one of waves, then to wave-particle duality, and ﬁnally to the current con-
ception in terms of quantum ﬁelds. This example is suggestive but also mis-
leading. Worrall argues that although conceptions of the nature of light have
changed through history, the mathematical equations describing it have not
but have been incorporated into successive theories, culminating, classically,
in Maxwell’s theory of electromagnetism, which is then taken to be subsumed
into quantum electrodynamics. The example can be misleading precisely
because it has led to the impression that realism is wedded to a consideration
of explicitly mathematical theories only and cannot offer much comfort to the
realist when it comes to (qualitatively expressed) biological theories, for ex-
ample. However, this is simply not the case.
    Mathematical equations represent one component of theoretical structure,
but nonmathematical, qualitative aspects can also be represented through the


186   Science and Partial Truth
resources of logic and set theory, giving a broader conception of theory struc-
ture, as we have seen.30 Structural realism has typically been presented within
the framework of the Received View of theories, and the relevant structure is
expressed via the Ramsey sentence of the theory.31 Unfortunately, tying this
view to the ‘‘Ramsiﬁcation’’ of theories generates two important problems.
    First of all, it means that it cannot, in fact, do what the realist wants, which
is to capture the continuity of structure beyond the empirical level. This is
because any two Ramsey sentences that are incompatible with one another
cannot have all their observable consequences in common (English 1973).
Hence theoretical equivalence collapses into empirical equivalence. Since any
form of realism must allow for a separation of the former from the latter, this
result is disastrous for the attempt to construct a viable form of structural
realism (see Ladyman 1998). Second, there is the so-called Newman problem,
which we can express as follows: Given any ‘‘aggregate’’ of relata A, a system
of relations can be found having any assigned structure compatible with the
cardinality of A; hence, the statement ‘‘there exists a system of relations,
deﬁned over A, which has the assigned structure’’ yields information only
about the cardinality of A. Thus, if science tells us only about the structure of
the world-as the structural realist maintains-then it actually tells us very
little. Indeed, it has been argued that structuralism collapses into triviality,
since all that the claim that the world has a certain structure amounts to is
that the relevant set of elements has a certain cardinality (see Demopolous
and Friedman 1985; Psillos 1999, pp. 63–65).32
    In order to get around these problems, Ladyman (1998) has suggested
abandoning Ramsey sentences in favor of the alternative descriptive frame-
work offered by the ‘‘semantic’’ or model-theoretic approach. As we have
seen, introducing ‘‘partial structures’’ allows this approach to capture, in a
natural fashion, both the relationships that hold between theories, horizon-
tally as it were, and those that hold vertically between a theory and the data
models. With regard to intertheory relationships, we have seen (in chapter 6)
that partial structures can capture precisely the element of continuity through
theory change that is emphasized by the structural realist. In particular, it
offers the possibility of accommodating examples of such continuity that have
been described as ‘‘approximate’’ or partial. Thus Worrall himself refers to the
shift from classical to relativistic mechanics and suggests that ‘‘there is ap-
proximate continuity of structure in this case’’ (1996, p. 160).33 He goes on to
write that ‘‘much clariﬁcatory work needs to be done on this position, espe-
cially concerning the notion of one theory’s structure approximating an-
other’’ (p. 161).34 The partial structures approach can contribute to this
clariﬁcation by indicating how such intertheoretical relationships can be re-
presented by partial isomorphisms holding between the model-theoretic
structures representing the theories concerned.
    Concerning intratheoretical relationships, partial structures also allow us to
capture these relationships downward from the theoretical models to the data
models and also upward, from the physical theory to the mathematical, as we
have indicated. We recall the point made earlier that such set-theoretical
relationships hold only between the mathematical structures and not between


                     From Pragmatic Realism to Structural Empiricism 187
such structures and ‘‘the world’’ itself (French and Ladyman 1999). The
realist representation of the relationship between theories and the world must
therefore be sought elsewhere, perhaps in a notion of reference appropriate for
a broadly structuralist metaphysics. We shall not pursue this here but shall
simply note Ladyman’s claim that the partial structures form of the semantic
approach offers a general account of theoretical structure that extends beyond
the mathematical equations and thus represents an appropriate formal
framework for structural realism. In particular, it is not clear that the
‘‘Newman Problem’’-typically formulated within the syntactic approach to
theories-has any bite within such a framework.
    Let us now consider the second of the questions. How is the notion of
‘‘content’’ to be explicated? Worrall famously drew on a historical precedent
in the work of Poincaré, who wrote that theoretical terms ‘‘are merely names
of the images we substituted for the real objects which Nature will hide forever
from our eyes. The true relations between these real objects are the only
reality we can ever obtain’’ (1905, p. 162).35 It is the nature of these ‘‘real
objects’’ that constitutes Worrall’s ‘‘content.’’ Now this may appear an un-
attractive claim in the context of modern science, as it puts these ‘‘natures’’
forever beyond our epistemic reach. Indeed, Psillos suggests it is reminiscent of
talk of medieval forms and substances, which, he claims, were decisively
overthrown by the scientiﬁc revolution (1999, pp. 155–157). This is his-
torically incorrect, as such ‘‘talk’’ persisted through the 19th century, with
physicists developing their theories within a variety of metaphysical frame-
works (Harman 1982). With regard to physical objects, in particular, it was
typically presupposed that such objects were individuals, where the meta-
physical sense of this individuality was explicated in terms of either an un-
derlying substance or, more commonly, spatiotemporal location.36 This kind
of talk did become suspect with the advent of quantum mechanics, and the
view arose that quantum particles cannot be regarded as individuals in some
sense (see French and Krause forthcoming).
    However, as is now well known, the physics itself does not determine such
a view, and it can be shown that quantum mechanics is compatible with an
alternative account that continues to regard the particles as individuals
(French 1985 and 1989c; Huggett 1997; van Fraassen 1991). Hence there
exists a form of ‘‘metaphysical underdetermination’’ in which we cannot infer
the appropriate metaphysics for describing the world from the physics itself.
This presents a problem for the realist, who is supposedly committed to the
claim that physics can tell us ‘‘how the world is.’’ If this ‘‘telling how it is’’ is
understood to include telling us whether quantum particles are individuals or
not, then the previous results undermine the realist’s claim.37 The con-
structive empiricist, of course, ﬁnds further support in this metaphysical un-
derdetermination and rests content with the weaker claim that physics-
appropriately interpreted in metaphysical terms-can tell us how the world
could be (van Fraassen 1991, pp. 480–482). The challenge for the realist is to
accommodate this underdetermination without saying ‘‘goodbye to meta-
physics’’ entirely38 (this phrase forming the title of the ﬁnal section of van
Fraassen’s book on quantum mechanics).


188   Science and Partial Truth
    It is this challenge that has been taken up by Ladyman’s ‘‘ontic’’ or
‘‘metaphysical’’ form of structural realism. The central idea of this view is that
we can avoid the epistemologically unattractive aspect of Worrall’s account
by doing away with the ‘‘hidden’’ objects and presenting an ontology that is
entirely structural.39 On this view, it is not merely that all that we know, but
all that there is, is structure. The gap between the ontology and our epistemic
reach is then closed, and furthermore, the challenge set by the metaphysical
underdetermination can be met by reconceptualizing the notion of ‘‘object’’
entirely in structural terms (Ladyman 1998; French forthcoming a).40
    There is still further work to be done, of course, particularly when it comes
to explicating the metaphysics and ontology of structure (see French and
Ladyman 2002), but at this point we shall consider a further problem for
realism and indicate how it might be met through the partial structures
approach.


   The Underdetermination of Theories by Evidence

We noted toward the beginning of this chapter how the history of science can
be drawn upon to generate a serious problem for the realist, in the form of the
pessimistic meta-induction. The claim that theories are underdetermined by
the evidence represents another piece of weaponry in the antirealist’s armory.
As we shall see, our framework offers, if not a resolution of this issue, then at
least a way of approaching it that demonstrates what is at stake (see Bueno
and French forthcoming).
   A clear expression of the underdetermination thesis goes as follows:
‘‘Suppose that two theories T1 and T2 are empirically equivalent, in the sense
that they make the same observational predictions. Then [according to the
UTE thesis] no body of observational evidence will be able to decide con-
clusively between T1 and T2’’ (Papineau 1996, p. 7). The consequences for
standard realism are clear: If UTE is correct then the realist is unable to
determine which of T1 and T2 is more worthy of belief, where ‘‘belief’’ here is
understood as ‘‘belief that . . . is true’’ and truth is explicated in the usual
correspondence sense. The lesson drawn by the constructive empiricist, for
example, is that we must abandon the view that theories should be believed to
be true in favor of the epistemically more secure position of accepting them as
empirically adequate only.
   A possible response to UTE is to appeal to factors going beyond the set of
observational consequences of the theory to background knowledge or ‘‘in-
direct evidence’’ of some form. The presence or absence of relationships be-
tween this ‘‘indirect evidence’’ and the theories concerned is then taken to
provide differential support for one theory over another and thus break the
underdetermination. Obviously, the precise form of this indirect evidence is
crucial, as is the nature of the relationship it is taken to have with the un-
derdetermined theories.
   Thus Laudan and Leplin argue that two empirically equivalent hypotheses
H1 and H2 may be evidentially distinguished because one of them, H1, say,


                     From Pragmatic Realism to Structural Empiricism 189
receives empirical support from evidence that is not a consequence of H1 and
H2 does not. The idea is as follows:
   Theoretical hypotheses H1 and H2 are empirically equivalent but con-
   ceptually distinct. H1, but not H2, is derivable from a more general theory T,
   which also entails another hypothesis H. An empirical consequence e of H is
   obtained. e supports H and thereby T. Thus e provides indirect evidential
   warrant for H1, of which it is not a consequence, without affecting the cre-
   dentials of H2. Thus one of two empirically equivalent hypotheses or theories
   can be evidentially supported to the exclusion of the other by being in-
   corporated into an independently supported, more general theory that does
   not support the other, although it does predict all the empirical consequences
   of the other. The view that assimilates evidence to consequences cannot, on
   pain of incoherence, accept the intuitive, uncontroversial principle that evi-
   dential support ﬂows ‘‘downward’’ across the entailment relation. (Laudan
   and Leplin 1991, p. 67; our emphasis)
However, in order for e to provide evidential warrant for H1, Laudan and
Leplin have to claim that T provides such warrant for H1, since it is through T
that the support given by e to H ‘‘ﬂows’’ to H1. Now, the claim that T provides
evidential warrant for H1 is question-begging, since by hypothesis H1 is de-
rived from T. In fact, as Mill noticed and Miller has spelled out more recently
(see Miller 1994, pp. 51–74), deductively valid arguments are circular. What
makes them valid is the fact that the information contained in the conclusion
H1 is already contained in the premise T. Thus, to claim that the premise
supplies evidence for the conclusion is, in the limit, to claim that the premise
supplies evidence for itself. Thus, although Laudan and Leplin do specify the
relationship between hypotheses and background theories, their reliance on
entailment leads them into circularity.
    Likewise, Ellis also wants to argue that factors beyond the strict empirical
consequences of a theory may provide differential support for it, where these
factors are themselves ultimately empirical. As we shall now see, by insisting
that the relevant relationships can be captured through the notion of em-
bedding, he offers a broader approach that opens the door to partial struc-
tures.
    The example he gives is of two theories of chemical combination, both of
which explain and are supported by the observation that one volume of hy-
drogen combines with one of chlorine to form two volumes of hydrogen
chloride. Here H1 is Avogadro’s theory, which postulates the existence of
atoms and molecules and ‘‘paramechanical’’ processes of chemical combi-
nation. H2 postulates the existence of certain ‘‘gas numbers’’ characteristic of
elemental and compound gases, together with certain laws relating the gas
numbers to combining volumes. The theories are equivalent in terms of their
empirically testable consequences but are clearly not equivalent ontologically.
    Despite their agreement in terms of consequences, Ellis claims that H1 and
H2 are not and never were empirically equivalent: ‘‘For they offered quite
different prospects for development and, as new theories were developed, new
facts became relevant to the acceptance of one of them (Avogadro’s theory)’’
(Ellis 1996, p. 183). By new facts Ellis means, for example, observations


190   Science and Partial Truth
concerning electrolysis that are not empirical consequences of Avogadro’s
theory (H1) but, he claims, certainly supported it, since they could be ‘‘readily
explained’’ on the atomic theory that H1 drew upon. So far this seems very
similar to the approach of Laudan and Leplin. Ellis, however, writes of H1
being embedded in T and having ‘‘well-established links’’ with-that is, having
hypotheses in common with-a wide range of other physical and chemical
theories. It is absurd, he claims, to state that Avogadro’s theory is empirically
equivalent to the ‘‘gas number’’ theory because

   the evidence in favour of Avogadro’s theory and against the gas number
   theory, is now overwhelming. This is so because the original theory of
   Avogadro has become embedded in a very general and powerful theory of
   chemical combination and has well-established links with (in the sense that
   it has hypotheses in common with) a wide range of other physical and
   chemical theories. Avogadro’s theory has gained support from these other
   theories because it has become an integral part of them. The evidence in
   favour of Avogadro’s theory cannot be identiﬁed with the conﬁrmation that
   its observational consequences have received. (Ellis 1996, pp. 183–184; the
   italics are ours)

    Ellis’s central point is that theories are open to further development that
may lead to the establishment of links with other theories such that the
former ‘‘pick up’’ the empirical support accruing to the latter. Since we cannot
know in advance what these further developments might be, we cannot say in
advance what evidence might distinguish two apparently empirically
equivalent theories. And the underlying reason, according to Ellis, is the
‘‘openness of the ﬁeld of evidence,’’ where the ‘‘ﬁeld of evidence’’ of a theory is
the set of possible empirical discoveries relevant to its truth or falsity. This set
cannot be identiﬁed with the set of empirical consequences of a theory since
the latter is a subset of the set of logical consequences of a theory, whereas the
former is not. In other words, there can be evidence for a theory not entailed
by a theory; the ﬁeld is open in a way that cannot be captured by focusing on
the theory’s logical consequences.
    This seems a plausible response to UTE, and, of course, this ‘‘openness’’ can
be appropriately represented by means of partial structures. We recall that the
openness of theories is exploited for further developments as the relations
effectively move out of the ‘‘unknown’’ R3 into the R1 and R2 components of a
partial relation R. Shifting attention to the empirical evidence and its rep-
resentation, the empirical substructures of a theory may themselves be
‘‘open’’ in interesting ways. Hence they, too, can be represented in terms of
partial substructures, allowing for the possibility of further developments
(Bueno 1997). In particular, the growth in our information about a certain
phenomenon can be represented by a hierarchy of partial structures in which,
at each level, previously undeﬁned partial relations (whose elements thus
belonged to the R3) come to be deﬁned, taking their elements as belonging
either to R1 or R2. In this manner, two theories that effectively ‘‘share’’ an
empirical (partial) substructure at a particular level of the hierarchy may
come to be evidentially distinguished at higher levels.


                     From Pragmatic Realism to Structural Empiricism 191
    At the level of ‘‘theoretical’’ models, new relations may come to be estab-
lished with other models whose empirical support can then be transmitted, as
it were, across these relations. With the models represented by partial struc-
tures, the appropriate representation of these relations would be in terms of
partial isomorphisms. The idea is that there exists a correspondence between
the families of partial relations in the model-theoretic representations of
Avogadro’s theory and the atomic theory, respectively. Ellis’s conception of the
‘‘ﬁeld of evidence’’ of a theory as the set of possible empirical discoveries rel-
evant to its truth or falsity has, as its formal counterpart, the R3 components in
a partial structure A, whose members are not determined beforehand but are
relevant, indeed crucial, for the quasi truth of sentences interpreted in A. The
openness of the ﬁeld of evidence is then partially mapped via the partial iso-
morphisms holding between the structures under consideration.
    There is the further issue of the manner in which evidence relates to theory
on this view. Here we can draw upon our probabilistic theory of conﬁrmation
articulated in terms of quasi truth as outlined in chapter 7. What we have,
then, is the following account: The underdetermination between Avogadro’s
theory and the ‘‘gas number’’ theory is broken through the relationship-
represented by partial isomorphisms-between the former and empirically
supported atomic theory. This introduces a differentiation in the degree of
quasi truth of the two theories such that, from this perspective, they can no
longer be regarded as equivalent. It is important to note that the empiricist
should have no difﬁculty with this account, since we are not claiming that the
theories in question are true but only quasi-true at best. And quasi truth
admits an empiricist reading (see Bueno 1997). Indeed, it turns out that the
framework of partial structures and quasi truth can be pressed into service on
the side of the constructive empiricist.


   Structural Empiricism

As we saw in chapter 4, the central concept of constructive empiricism is that
of ‘‘empirical adequacy.’’ If one were to accept the development of the model-
theoretic approach represented by partial structures, how might this notion be
represented within such a framework? The question is interesting precisely
because the answer would indicate how constructive empiricism could ac-
quire the advantages of the partial structures framework in terms of capturing
the openness of scientiﬁc practice and so forth.
    One possibility would be to identify ‘‘empirical adequacy’’ with quasi truth
by taking a theory’s empirical substructures (interpreted as partial) to be
embeddable in the theoretical structures (also regarded as partial, of course)
and, further, regarding the theoretical elements of A as just convenient ﬁc-
tions that have pragmatic value only (da Costa and French 1990). Since a
sentence S being quasi-true means that everything happens in the relevant
domain as if it were true, S could be said to save the appearances and, it has
been claimed, in precisely the sense that the constructive empiricist wants (da
Costa and French 1990).


192   Science and Partial Truth
    Unfortunately, as Bueno has pointed out, this latter claim is actually false
(Bueno 1997). First of all, the constructive empiricist is not a ﬁctionalist with
regard to theoretical entities but insists on remaining agnostic concerning
their existence. Second, it is the models of data or appearances, as van Fraassen
calls them, that are embeddable within the theoretical structures and that
should be appropriately partialized, as it were.
    An alternative and improved account can be given by drawing on the
notion of partial isomorphism to characterize the relationship between the
appearances and the empirical substructures (Bueno 1997). In these terms,
the former are regarded as partially embeddable within the theoretical
structures (as indicated before in our discussion of Ellis’s response to the UTE
argument), and if this is the case, then the theory can be regarded as partially
or quasi-empirically adequate (Bueno 1997, p. 596). As Bueno says, this
offers a plausible elaboration of van Fraassen’s suggestion that an appropriate
notion of approximation needs to be introduced into the consideration of the
relationship between theory and evidence.
    However, the following criticism must be faced: The cardinality of the
domain might not be the same as that of the empirical substructures, in which
case a partial isomorphism cannot in fact be deﬁned as holding between them.
In response, Bueno has proposed the introduction of a hierarchy of partial
models of phenomena of increasing cardinality, which represents the gain in
information about the phenomena at each level of the hierarchy (1997,
pp. 600–603). He writes, ‘‘In this context, we then say that T is empirically
adequate if it is pragmatically true in the (partial) empirical substructure E
according to the structure A, where A is the last level of the hierarchy of
models of phenomena (being thus a total structure)’’ (pp. 602–603). Thus the
identiﬁcation of empirically adequacy and pragmatic or quasi truth is
achieved by regarding a theory as empirically adequate if it is pragmatically or
quasi-true with regard to the last level of the hierarchy of models of the
phenomena.
    This then yields a characterization of a form of ‘‘degree’’ of empirical
adequacy that captures the way, in practice, one theory might be regarded as
more empirically adequate than another in that it takes account of more
empirical information. The central idea is that the higher the relevant level in
the hierarchy with regard to which the theory is quasi-empirically adequate,
the more (quasi-) empirically adequate a theory will be (Bueno 1999a). This
characterization in turn can be used to model empirical progress in science:
Such progress corresponds to an increase in the degree of empirical adequacy,
and this, in turn, is represented by an increase in the level of the partial
models of the phenomena. Furthermore, theoretical progress can also be ac-
commodated: Where the realist insists that a new theory is accepted over an
old one because the former entails new phenomena and these are regarded as
true, the empiricist takes such phenomena to be representable in the hier-
archy, with the appropriate partial isomorphism holding between them and
the empirical substructures of the new theory. Thus new kinds of phenomena
can also be accommodated by the empiricist, and the success of science-
which, we recall, the realist insisted must be seen as miraculous in the


                    From Pragmatic Realism to Structural Empiricism 193
absence of realism-comes to be understood in terms of the structural inter-
connections between empirical substructures and the hierarchy of partial
models of the phenomena (Bueno 1999a).41
    Of course, such an understanding is far too ‘‘thin’’ for the realist’s tastes,
and as we have seen, explicating this notion of ‘‘success’’ in non-question-
begging terms is a tricky business. However, as we have said, our aim in this
chapter is not to defend either realism or antirealism but to indicate how both
sides in the debate can beneﬁt from the partial structures approach. We be-
lieve that what this debate needs is just the kind of detailed articulation that
structural realism and empiricism offer and that these positions represent, if
not the best, then at least two of the more interesting hopes for the future.




194   Science and Partial Truth
         9
         EXTENSIONS

As we have already indicated, there are obvious ways in which the partial
structures approach can be further extended and applied. Consider, for ex-
ample, the role of models in explanation, which has received increased at-
tention following the well-known criticisms of the ‘‘covering law’’ approach.1
We can take as the basis of a model-theoretic account of explanation Hughes’s
assertion that ‘‘We explain some feature X of the world by displaying a model
M of part of the world and demonstrating that there is a feature Y of the model
that corresponds to X, and is not explicit in the deﬁnition of M’’ (Hughes
1993, p. 132). Although Hughes himself does not go into details as to how we
might characterize the relationships between these features, we can easily see
how the mechanism of partial isomorphisms can be put to work here. Earlier,
Thompson claimed that the semantic approach can better accommodate
‘‘complex explanatory frameworks’’ than can the Received View (Thompson
1989). Crucially, he argues, it can capture the way in which theories can be
conjointly employed in explanation, which he sees as a prominent feature of
biological explanations in particular. Again, such features of explanation in
science can be straightforwardly represented by using the resources of our
approach.
    Furthermore, we might consider the question of how it is that an ex-
planation can convey understanding, even when it involves a highly abstract
and comparatively unfamiliar model. Hughes’s answer is that, ﬁrst, the re-
sources of the model are typically tucked away, as it were, so that we have to
apply it to successive phenomena in order to discover them, and in so doing
we increase both our understanding and our familiarity with the model, and
second, such models carry with them a ‘‘greater volume of associations’’ than
more concrete forms, allowing them to be applied across different domains
(1993, p. 147). Again, both these features can be accommodated within our
approach: We have emphasized, repeatedly, the openness of partial structures
and how they can represent the heuristic fruitfulness of models and theories,


                                     195
and, in particular, the framework of partial isomorphisms holding ‘‘horizon-
tally’’ and ‘‘vertically’’ allows us to represent the way in which various model-
based resources can be transported between scientiﬁc domains. Finally,
Hughes’s discussion of the evaluation of explanations, in which he reminds us
that models should be regarded as neither true nor false but only as more or
less ‘‘adequate,’’ can be straightforwardly brought within the framework of
quasi truth.2
    If models are allowed to play a role in explanations in this way, then it is
hard to resist the suggestion that they also represent (Hughes 1993). The
manner in which this suggestion has been followed up has proved con-
tentious, however. Van Fraassen, for example, has argued that an appropriate
account of resemblance can be given in terms of isomorphism (1994). This
has been strongly criticized by Suárez, who argues that just as isomorphism
cannot capture representation in art, so it is inappropriate in the scientiﬁc
context as well (1999b). Similarly, Hughes himself has drawn on Goodman’s
rejection of resemblance in favor of denotation, when it comes to repre-
sentation in art, and, rather confusingly perhaps, favors denotation rather
than isomorphism or similarity while also maintaining the model-theoretic
view of theories (Hughes 1997).
    Casting the debate in terms of partial structures offers the possibility of
shedding new light on some of the issues involved and, perhaps, answering
some of the objections. Thus Suárez’s criticism hinges on certain examples
from the history of art that purport to show that not only is isomorphism not
sufﬁcient for representation-since the latter is taken to involve intention-but
also it cannot even be necessary (Suárez 1999b). Picasso’s Guernica, for ex-
ample, is ambiguous as to what it represents, and the canvas cannot be said to
enter into an isomorphic relationship, at least not straightforwardly. An even
more extreme example is that of Mondrian, whose work, it is claimed, cannot
be said to represent or be isomorphic to anything.
    But this is too quick. Mondrian himself insisted that what his paintings
represented was ‘‘pure structure,’’ and this can, of course, be accommodated
by the model-theoretic view. Furthermore, if we broaden our notion of rep-
resentation to include partial isomorphisms, then we can understand Guernica
as standing in a plurality of such relationships with various objects. Indeed,
Budd has shown how an account of representation based on isomorphism
can, in fact, account for a wide range of examples, from Holbein’s The Am-
bassadors, through various examples of abstract art to Escher’s drawings
(Budd 1993). Indeed, we would say that what Budd is actually offering is an
account based on partial isomorphisms suitably adapted for the artistic do-
main (see French forthcoming b).
    The example of Escher’s work is particularly signiﬁcant because Budd
claims his approach is able to accommodate ‘‘inconsistent’’ or contradictory
representations. Perhaps the most obvious example on the scientiﬁc side is one
we’ve already encountered-namely, Bohr’s model of the atom. Hughes ar-
gues that this can be accommodated within his ‘‘denotational’’ approach as a
‘‘local’’ model that denotes, and hence represents, a clearly speciﬁed type of
system (1997, p. 330). Quantum mechanics, on the other hand, can be


196   Science and Partial Truth
considered a ‘‘global’’ theory and deals with a heterogeneous collection of
physical systems. In this case, we can still say that there is representation
insofar as each individual system in this collection can be denoted by a par-
ticular model deﬁned in terms of the theory (Hughes 1997). Curiously,
however, the inconsistency at the heart of the Bohr model is not discussed at
all, and the issue arises as to how Hughes’s Goodmanian approach could be
extended to accommodate inconsistent denotation. Adapting the account we
have given in chapter 5, this aspect can also be captured within a general
partial structures approach to representation (French forthcoming b).
    Introducing partial isomorphisms into Budd’s account suggests a way of
extending it to cover other forms of artistic representation. Indeed, this kind of
approach might be extended to cover all kinds of representation in general.
Consider, for example, the way we represent ‘‘everyday’’ situations. It is on
the basis of such representations that we construct our decision making.
However, there is now a considerable body of psychological research that
suggests that these constructions often violate certain consistency or, more
generally, coherence constraints. This work has generated enormous con-
troversy, with reactions ranging from the insistence that what these results
reveal is nothing less than widespread irrationality (Stich 1984), to the out-
right denial that empirical ﬁndings of this kind can ever show that people are
systematically irrational (Cohen 1981). Naturalistically inclined philosophers
of science have been quick to seize upon this work, claiming that it shows that
the ‘‘traditional’’ model of scientiﬁc decision making (and, in particular, the
Bayesian variants thereof) must be modiﬁed or abandoned altogether (see, for
example, Giere 1988). Both laypeople and scientists, it is argued, are simply
not the ideal reasoners the traditional view would have them be. Typically,
this nonideal character is cashed out in terms of nonepistemic, culturally
determined factors that are taken to ﬁll the niche left by empirical success.
    Elsewhere we have suggested an alternative way of understanding the
nonideal character of ‘‘everyday’’ decision making in terms of the partial
nature of the models employed (da Costa and French 1993b). The intuitive
judgments that are involved are made under uncertainty, where this un-
certainty results from a lack of knowledge of the ‘‘true’’ state of the world. We
have argued that this lack of knowledge can be suitably incorporated into the
partial structures account, where these structures precisely express our ig-
norance and fallibility in dealing with ‘‘the world.’’ It is through them and the
notion of partial truth that we can

   1. Accommodate the existence of models that have demonstrable prag-
      matic worth but that are also formally inconsistent or incoherent, and
   2. Accommodate the improvement in and development of these models.
In this manner, the practice of both scientists and ‘‘natural’’ reasoners is
uniﬁed under a single conceptual framework that stresses the partial, in-
complete, and developing nature of our representations of reality. Thus, this
work can be seen as an attempt to ground the commonality of reasoning
processes within the partial structures approach, emphasizing, in particular,
such epistemic factors as empirical success.


                                                                Extensions 197
    We believe we can extend this work even further, to include the ‘‘non-
scientiﬁc’’ beliefs of other cultures. The ‘‘classic’’ example would be the
inconsistent witchcraft beliefs of Azande, which have acquired the status of a
cultural datum against which successive philosophers can test their particular
views of cross-cultural understanding. They have supplied much of the grist to
the mill of those relativists who insist that not only can the content of beliefs
vary from culture to culture but also so can the underlying formal frame-
work.3 Hence such beliefs offer the most acute challenge to the rationalist,
who is now caught between the devil of logical relativism and the deep blue
sea of an imperialistic attribution of irrationality. Both alternatives have
tended to trade on an incorrect analogy between the scientiﬁc and magico-
religious frameworks: the ‘‘imperialistic’’ response views witchcraft in terms of
some kind of primitive, personiﬁed causes, whereas the relativist has tended to
draw a comparison with Kuhn, suggesting that Azande operates within a
particular social paradigm (see Barnes 1968).
    This has been rejected by Horton and others, who argue that Zande
witchcraft beliefs are akin to the theoretical beliefs of Western science (Horton
1967 and 1982). We agree with the sentiment but not with Horton’s overly
positivistic characterization of science. Instead, we have argued that Zande
beliefs can also be accommodated within the partial structures framework (da
Costa and French 1995): That is, these beliefs should be regarded, from the
intrinsic perspective, as quasi-true and the representations of witchcraft un-
derstood as semipropositional in Sperber’s sense, and therefore, from the ex-
trinsic perspective, these representations are themselves appropriately
modeled in terms of partial structures. Again, the inconsistency is handled by
appropriately modifying our discussion of the Bohr model, and the ‘‘open-
ness’’ of Zande beliefs, the way in which they are only loosely ‘‘held together,’’
can be straightforwardly accommodated.
    Given the crucial role of this example in debates concerning the appro-
priate characterization of rationality, it should come as no surprise that we
believe the latter should be refashioned. The standard view typically focuses
on criteria of consistency and truth, which are held to be ‘‘universal,’’ with
belief systems such as those of Azande subject to particular ‘‘contextual’’
criteria (see, for example, Lukes 1970). These may violate the laws of logic and
be analyzed in terms of the coherence or pragmatist theories of truth (Lukes
1970, p. 211).
    What we are suggesting is the elevation of the latter to the level of a
universal criterion. The advocacy of universal criteria of truth in terms of
correspondence offers too much of a tempting hostage to fortune, as the rel-
ativist can point to all the well-known difﬁculties in maintaining such a view
in the face of both scientiﬁc revolutions and radically different cultural beliefs.
Furthermore, the distinction between universal and contextual criteria-with
radically different cultural beliefs regarded as ‘‘true’’ in the latter rather than
former sense-runs into problems with the relativists’ invocation of scientiﬁc
beliefs as on a par with cultural ones: For if radically different cultural beliefs
are to be taken as true in the contextually based sense only, then so should
radically different scientiﬁc beliefs. If the rationalist is unwilling to extend


198   Science and Partial Truth
parity to such scientiﬁc beliefs, then she should explain why these are taken to
be privileged. Adopting the realist stance that scientiﬁc beliefs are so privileged
in that they correspond to reality not only begs the question but also lays her
open to the sorts of criticisms we have covered in chapter 8.
    We agree with the relativist to this extent: that both scientiﬁc and cultural
beliefs should be treated as on a par, in the sense that both can be brought
under a unitary framework. However, it should also be clear that we agree
with the rationalist that universal criteria of truth apply, with the difference
being that the appropriate understanding of truth is pragmatic. With both
Zande and scientiﬁc beliefs taken as ‘‘representational’’ and quasi-true, in-
consistency can then be accommodated. Correspondence truth and con-
sistency still come into the picture, of course, but at the level of factual beliefs.
It is here that the rationalists’ ‘‘bridgehead’’ between cultures (or scientiﬁc
paradigms) is located. What this amounts to is a broadly pragmatist account
of rationality, but this is perhaps an extension too far, and we shall leave the
details to future works.




                                                                  Extensions 199
This page intentionally left blank
          NOTES

   Chapter 1
     1. In a recent paper Fernández Moreno addresses the twin issues of
(a) whether Tarski intended his theory to be a correspondence theory of truth and
(b) whether his theory is ‘‘in fact’’ a correspondence theory (2001; see also the
other papers in this issue of Synthese). With regard to the ﬁrst issue, if the notion of
‘‘correspondence’’ is understood in a rather weak sense, in terms of the holding of
certain relations between linguistic expressions and extralinguistic entities (as
Tarski himself appears to have understood it), and not in the stronger sense
according to which these relations must be understood as isomorphisms, then, on
the basis of a nicely detailed historical analysis, Fernández Moreno concludes that
Tarski’s intentions were to capture this sense of correspondence (2001, p. 130).
With regard to the second issue, he defends Tarski’s explanation of truth in terms
of satisfaction against accusations that it is either uninteresting or trivial and
concludes that it ﬁts his characterization of what a correspondence theory should
be (2001, pp. 139–140).
     2. As Hodges and Etchemendy have emphasized, the notion of truth in a
structure cannot in fact be found in Tarski’s 1935 paper and is not presented
explicitly until 1957 (Hodges 1986; Etchemendy 1988). This has to do partly with
the lack of agreement at the time of what a structure is and partly to do with the
treatment of the nonlogical constants of a model-theoretic language (which
Hodges views as indexical expressions).
     3. According to Suppes, ‘‘Tarski himself was skeptical about the application
of systematic semantical methods in the analysis of natural language’’ (Suppes
1988, p. 87), but his student Montague analyzed the semantics of natural lan-
guage in model-theoretic terms (Suppes 1988 for references).
     4. We shall return to this idea of initially different beliefs stabilizing around
the same conclusion in our discussion of induction in chapter 7.
     5. There is an interesting alteration here, from ‘‘cannot’’ in (1907a) to ‘‘do
not’’ in (1932).
     6. Thus in a note to his earlier paper (James 1885), which foreshadowed
much but by no means all of the account of truth subsequently presented (1907a),


                                         201
James identiﬁes as a defect in this earlier account ‘‘the possibly undue prominence
given to resembling, which altho a fundamental function in knowing truly, is so
often dispensed with’’ (1932, p. 41)
     7. In his own resituating of James within the concerns of contemporary
philosophy, Putnam notes, ‘‘To say that truth is ‘correspondence to reality’ is not
false but empty, as long as nothing is said about what the ‘correspondence’ is’’
(Putnam 1995, p. 10)
     8. Thus Smith writes: ‘‘Despite signiﬁcant differences between the views of
Peirce and James on this topic, they came together in holding an agreement or
correspondence theory of truth. In view of this fact, one cannot say for either of
them that there is a special ‘pragmatist’ conception of truth. If any novel element
has been introduced, it is the insistence that ‘correspondence’ not be conceived as
a static or timeless relation having no connection with the process of inquiry and
the tracing of consequences. If a label is needed, one could not do better than to
call their theory of truth a theory of ‘dynamic correspondence’’’ (Smith 1978,
p. 77) Of course, from our perspective, this is just as distorting, in its own way.
     9. For the best developed account of the nature and role of ‘‘domains of
knowledge’’ in science, for example, see Shapere 1977.
     10. It is worth noting that this account is essentially based on classical logic,
since every A-normal model is classical; it can, however, be extended to non-
classical logics. For example, instead of invoking classical partial structures, we
can consider paraconsistent partial structures and develop a theory of para-
consistent partial (or pragmatic) truth. Moreover, the logic appropriate to handle
partial truth, as delineated here, is so-called Jaskowski’s logic (see Jaskowski 1969;
da Costa 1989; da Costa, Bueno, and French 1998a); analogously, one can show
that the logic which is convenient for handling nonclassical partial truth, in
particular, paraconsistent partial truth, is a kind of generalized Jaskowski’s logic.
We shall recall these points when we come to consider inconsistencies in science
in chapter 5.


   Chapter 2
     1. However, as we noted in the previous chapter, Hodges has pointed out
that Tarski did not, in fact, deﬁne this notion of truth in a structure in his classic
paper.
     2. An erudite presentation of the origins of this approach is given in Suppe
1989, pp. 3–20.
     3. Thus Redhead, for example, has remarked on the heuristic fruitfulness of
mathematical reformulations of a theory (Redhead 1975).
     4. Here we are thinking in particular of the well-known example of the
failure to eliminate by deﬁnition the notion of force from axiomatized classical
mechanics, which did so much to disabuse us of the notion that force was an
anthropomorphic concept that could be eliminated in this manner (see, for ex-
ample, da Costa 1987a, p. 4).
     5. We believe that the denigration of axiomatization that one sometimes
comes across in the philosophical literature is a consequence of a failure to ade-
quately comprehend the nature of the axiomatic method. In particular, it is not the
case that axiomatization must proceed within ﬁrst-order logic; Carnap, for ex-
ample, employed higher order logic (type theory). Having said that, in some cases
ﬁrst-order axiomatization is relevant, as in the example of Tarski’s axiomatization


202    Notes to Pages 15–24
of elementary algebra and geometry. In general, it is clear that appropriate for-
malization is essential for the proof of various metamathematical results. Without
formalization, there would be no Gödel’s Theorems, for example!
     6. It may be useful here to draw on a distinction made by Hellman in his
defense of a ‘‘modal-structuralist’’ approach to set theory (Hellman 1988, p. 449).
Hellman suggests that axiomatization has two main purposes: The ﬁrst is to codify
proofs, and, given the success in formally capturing ﬁrst-order logical consequence,
axioms are typically ﬁrst-order and presented ‘‘as if being categorically’’ asserted
(1988, p. 449). On the other hand, there is the alternative aim of expressing the
kinds of structures that are the object of investigation, and in fulﬁllment of this aim
ﬁrst-order languages may have to give way to second-order ones. For Hellman
these structures are mathematical, of course, but for us they are generally ‘‘sci-
entiﬁc.’’
     7. Of course, these developments all presuppose classical logic. Another kind
of generalization would be obtained by using nonclassical logic as the underlying
framework, as we have already indicated.
     8. Cf. Laymon 1987, p. 197; and Mac Lane: ‘‘All mathematics can indeed be
built up within set theory, but the description of many mathematical objects as
structures is much more illuminating than some explicit set-theoretic description.’’
(1996, p. 174).
     9. There are certain similarities-but also crucial formal differences-
between the partial structures approach and the work of Wojcicki. For example,
he considers four set-theoretical ‘‘pictures’’ of the relationships between scientiﬁc
laws and the empirical phenomena within their ‘‘scope.’’ The second of these
pictures Wojcicki calls ‘‘classical-diachronic’’ and introduces functions that are
only partially deﬁned into his set-theoretic structure, giving what he calls a
‘‘partial physical system’’ (1974, p. 338; see also 1975). This allows him to deﬁne
a sequence of such systems, which, he claims, captures the sense in which our
measurements of certain parameters abstracted from the physical phenomena are
subject to improvement over time. Clearly what Wojcicki is dealing with here is
the issue of intertheory relations, which we shall take up in chapter 6. However,
his approach might be seen as more restrictive than ours in focusing on diachronic
relations between measurable quantities. Here we might echo Stachel’s criticism of
similar work by Dalla Chiara: ‘‘If we look at physics as the evolution of conceptual
and instrumental structures under the impact of the interplay between experi-
mentation with the conceptual and instrumental aspects of the structure, then we
are led to focus attention more on these conceptual structures and their changes
from theory to theory rather than on the consequent numerical agreements or
disagreements between measurements of quantities deemed to correspond to the
theories in question’’ (Stachel 1983, p. 95). It is precisely such a shift in attention
that we claim our approach is able to accommodate.
     Having said that, from our perspective it is interesting that Wojcicki notes,
ﬁrst of all, that what he calls ‘‘phenomena’’ may be viewed as ‘‘arbitrary trees of
partial structures’’ and, second, that since each such tree deﬁnes a Kripke model
for the relevant (formal) language, this approach allows for the possibility of
languages based on nonclassical logics (a possibility we shall also consider, albeit
somewhat tangentially) in subsequent chapters.
     Wojcicki’s third picture, which he calls the ‘‘operational picture,’’ attempts to
capture the ‘‘vertical’’ relations between theory and phenomena by means of for-
mally deﬁned ‘‘idealizations’’ (1974, pp. 339–342). This allows him to sketch an
account of the ‘‘approximate truth’’ of a theory, where a theory is approximately



                                                       Notes to Pages 25–29 203
true in an ‘‘operational structure’’ if and only if it is true in an idealization of this
structure. This is clearly different from our approach, although in his ﬁnal ‘‘pic-
ture’’ Wojcicki indicates-without going into details-how the ‘‘operational’’ and
‘‘diachronic’’ approaches may be combined through the introduction of ‘‘partial
operational systems’’ (1974, p. 342).
      10. We are grateful to Otavio Bueno and James Ladyman for bringing our
attention to, and pressing us on, this point.
      11. Cf. Suppes again: ‘‘The separation of the purely set-theoretic character-
ization of the structure of models for a theory from the axioms proper is signiﬁcant
in deﬁning certain important notions concerning models for a theory’’ (1957,
p. 260)-one of these notions being that of isomorphism, of course.
      12. Recall Hellman’s distinction stated in n. 6. According to van Fraassen,
the axioms of, say, quantum mechanics as presented in a standard physics text-
book should not be regarded as an attempt at codiﬁcation from the perspective of
ﬁrst-order logic but rather as an ‘‘expression’’, to use Hellman’s term, of the
structures described by the theory.
      13. As he acknowledges, van Fraassen expressed a similar view himself
earlier in his career (1970) but has since come to renounce it.
      14. In response to van Fraassen’s claim that the notion of one structure being
‘‘embedded’’ in another cannot be captured syntactically, Turney (1990) has de-
veloped a syntactic notion of ‘‘implantability,’’ which, he argues, is analogous to the
semantic concept of embeddability. This allows him to obtain syntactic equivalents
of van Fraassen’s all-important deﬁnitions of empirical adequacy and empirical
equivalence. Nevertheless, Turney agrees that the semantic, or model-theoretic,
account is an improvement over the syntactic account, on the grounds that it is
better able to represent the relationship between scientiﬁc theories and observations.
      15. The point was previously made by Suppes:

   Theories of more complicated structure like quantum mechanics, classical
   thermodynamics, or a modern quantitative version of learning theory, need to
   use not only general ideas of set theory but also many results concerning the
   real numbers. Formalization of such theories in ﬁrst-order logic is utterly im-
   practical. Theories of this sort are similar to the theories mainly studied in pure
   mathematics in their degree of complexity. In such contexts it is very much
   simpler to assert things about models of the theory rather than to talk directly
   and explicitly about the sentences of the theory, perhaps the main reason for this
   being that the notion of a sentence of the theory is not well deﬁned when the
   theory is not given in standard formalization. (Suppes 1967, p. 58)

      16. A categorical theory is one that has all its models isomorphic to each other.
The only such ﬁrst-order theories are the complete theories of ﬁnite structures.
      17. Bueno has argued that empirical adequacy can be understood in terms of
our notion of quasi or pragmatic truth (Bueno 1997). This then leads to a form of
‘‘structural empiricism,’’ which we shall consider further in chapter 8.
      18. And thus, according to Suppe, this approach should be rejected, for the
sorts of reasons already noted. For further-rather intemperate-criticism of the
structuralist program, see Truesdell (1984). Truesdell’s chief complaint concerns
the structuralists’ misunderstanding and misuse of the history of science, but he
also directs both his ﬁre and ire against McKinsey and Suppes’s attempted for-
malization of classical particle mechanics. His case is undermined somewhat by
his bizarre allegation that the ‘‘Suppesians’’ ‘‘are terriﬁed of more than ‘an



204    Notes to Pages 29–32
afternoon’s work’ in formal logic’’ (1984, p. 568). Given McKinsey’s invocation of
Tarski in support of his work, one can only speculate as to the existence of cross-
purposes with respect to what counts as ‘‘logic’’ and ‘‘axiomatization’’! A more
sympathetic review can be found in da Costa and Bueno (1998).
     19. On the structuralist account, the distinction between believing a theory
or, more crucially, part of a theory to be true and accepting it as empirically
adequate is simply meaningless.
     20. This is part and parcel of his general claim that the language of science
must be taken literally.
     21. Of course, we may not know whether it is true or false. This will be the
case with theoretical, as opposed to empirical, content, and for van Fraassen the
appropriate stance with regard to the entities referred to is that of the agnostic.
With regard to such content, the best we can do, according to van Fraassen, is to
consider how the world could be the way the theory says it is (1989, p. 193). This
attitude to theoretical content is, of course, the basis of his modal interpretation of
quantum mechanics, for example, where his antirealist approach is worked out
with regard to a speciﬁc theory (van Fraassen 1991).
     22. And a description of structure, in this sense, yields also a description of
content (1989, p. 226).
     23. As noted by French and Ladyman with regard to van Fraassen’s account
(1999). For a useful and illuminating attempt at such an elaboration, see Bueno
1999b.
     24. Today classical mathematics is the study of three basic classes of models
and their combinations, as Bourbaki recognized. These are the topological struc-
tures, the algebraic structures, and the ordered structures. Any other structure of
present-day mathematics is some combination of these basic structures.
     25. In more complex structures, there may be various principal sets and
various auxiliary sets; both kinds of sets are base sets.


   Chapter 3
      1. It is interesting, given the motivation behind the development of the
formalism of ‘‘partial’’ truth, that the idea of an ‘‘iconic’’ relation is due to Peirce
(as noted by Black 1962, p. 221, fn. 1 and Suppe 1997, p. 97): ‘‘An Icon is a sign
which refers to the Object that it denotes merely by virtue of characters of its own,
and which it possesses, just the same, whether any such Object actually exists or
not. . . . Anything whatever . . . is an Icon of anything, in so far as it is like that
thing and used as a sign of it’’ (Peirce 1931–35, p. 247).
      2. Accusations to the effect that meaning and use cannot be separated in this
manner are deﬂected by referring to ‘‘well-deﬁned technical contexts’’ when it
comes to meaning, and different kinds of question about the models in mathe-
matical and scientiﬁc domains when it comes to use (Suppes 1961, pp. 166–167).
With regard to this aspect, Apostel’s work can be seen as complementary to
Suppes’s in focusing on the function of models: ‘‘The concept of model will be
useless if we cannot deduce from its function a determinate structure. The scientist
in his comments uses the ‘model’ concept in all the ways we described and thus
discards the simple and clear language of model-theory in formal semantics or
syntax. Can we give to his use of the term an adequate rational reconstruction, or
are we prevented from doing so? We are convinced that it is possible to derive
structural features from the functional characterization’’ (Apostel 1961, pp. 3–4).



                                                        Notes to Pages 32–41 205
      3. However, he then qualiﬁes this by noting that since Suppes allows for a
difference in use of models, their disagreement may be merely verbal.
      4. Cf. Achinstein’s distinction between ‘‘true,’’ ‘‘adequate,’’ and ‘‘distorted’’
models (1968, pp. 209–210).
      5. Achinstein distinguishes between ‘‘theoretical’’ and ‘‘imaginary’’ models,
where the latter are regarded as devoid of existential commitment (1968, pp. 212–
221).
      6. Cf. Black, who notes that ‘‘nowadays logicians use ‘model’ to stand for an
‘interpretation’ or ‘realization’ of a formal axiom system’’ (1962, p. 226, fn. 7).
      7. And with regard to models in particular, crucial elements of this apparatus
can be traced back to Carnap’s classic Introduction to Semantics (Carnap 1942).
      8. These are also referred to as ‘‘coordinative deﬁnitions,’’ ‘‘semantic rules,’’
‘‘epistemic correlations,’’ and so forth.
      9. Carnap (1946) uses the phrases ‘‘constructing models’’ and ‘‘giving in-
terpretations’’ synonymously.
      10. Nagel can be taken as allied with the ‘‘modelists’’: ‘‘For the purposes of
analysis it will be useful to distinguish three components in a theory: (1) an
abstract calculus that is the logical skeleton of the explanatory system, and that
‘‘implicitly deﬁnes’’ the basic notions of the system; (2) a set of [correspondence]
rules that in effect assign an empirical content to the abstract calculus by relating
it to the concrete materials of observation and experimentation; and (3) an in-
terpretation or model for the abstract calculus, which supplies some ﬂesh for the
skeletal structure in terms of more or less familiar conceptual or visualizable
materials’’ (Nagel 1961, p. 90).
      11. This is precisely the example used by Psillos in his development of an
‘‘analogical’’ approach to models (Psillos 1995 and 1999).
      12. Furthermore, the sorts of examples that Psillos has in mind as giving
access to the world-namely, models of the optical ether-were already dismissed
by Braithwaite as ‘‘imaginary,’’ as we have just noted.
      13. ‘‘All swans are white’’ has the same logical form as ‘‘All electrons have
integral charge,’’ yet from the truth of either we can infer nothing about the
plausibility of the other (unless, of course, we were to adopt some sort of struc-
turalist view).
      14. Cf. Bunge: ‘‘The representation of a concrete object is always partial and
more or less conventional. The model object will miss certain traits of its referent,
it is apt to include imaginary elements, and will recapture only approximately the
relations among the aspects it does incorporate’’ (1973, p. 92).
      15. Cf. Black: ‘‘A promising model is one with implications rich enough to
suggest novel hypotheses and speculations in the primary ﬁeld of investigation’’
(1962, p. 233).
      16. Cf. Black, again (1962, pp. 232–233): ‘‘To make good use of a model, we
usually need an intuitive grasp . . . of its capacities, but so long as we can freely
draw inferences from the model, its picturability is of no importance’’ (his em-
phasis). The point is that the properties given in the model must be better known
than those in the intended ﬁeld of application (p. 232).
      17. Achinstein lumps Hesse in with the Received View, noting that in her
earlier paper (Hesse 1953–54) she failed to distinguish analogies from theoretical
models. Although this is corrected in (Hesse 1970) she nevertheless regards her
models1 as ‘‘total interpretations of a deductive system’’ (1970, p. 10). The at-
tempt to situate Achinstein and Hesse together in a third ‘‘analogical’’ approach to
models, distinct from both the Received View and the model-theoretic approach, is



206    Notes to Pages 41–48
therefore misplaced (Psillos 1995). Insofar as generic considerations as to the
nature of analogies can be abstracted from Hesse’s account, they can be accom-
modated within our version of the model-theoretic approach, as we emphasize.
      18. In a later essay, Achinstein emphasizes this distinction in the context of a
discussion of Maxwell’s notion of ‘‘physical analogy’’ (1991). In particular, he
argues that such an analogy based on identity of properties allows for the genera-
tion of explanatory hypotheses, as in the case of the kinetic theory of gases, whereas
it does not when based on formal identities between the relevant laws, as in the
example of the analogy between the electromagnetic ﬁeld and an imaginary ﬂuid.
      19. It is interesting that in his own attempt to accommodate the different
functions of models, Apostel introduces the notion of a ‘‘partial model,’’ where this
is understood as ‘‘satisfying’’ only certain ‘‘central’’ features of a theory, such as
well-conﬁrmed laws, and not others (1961, p. 6). In particular, Apostel hints that
by introducing such a partial relationship between model and theory we might
accommodate the developmental function of models.
      20. According to Suppe, iconic models were incorporated into the Semantic
Approach from early on (1977, pp. 221–230). From this perspective, the Received
View’s combination of theorems plus correspondence rules represents a formulation
of a theory, rather than the theory itself. If this formulation is empirically true, it
will describe both the actual world and the theory; hence the formulation will have
two mathematical models. And if it is accepted that if the theory is correct then it
can be said to stand in an iconic relation to the world, then the relationship
between these two models is also (‘‘probably’’) iconic. Thus, ‘‘Campbell, Nagel and
Hesse are correct in insisting that the theory cannot just be the partially interpreted
formalism, and must include a model-the model being the theory-which, if the
theory is true, stands in an iconic relation to its phenomena’’ (Suppe 1977, p. 101).
      21. Here again the issue arises as to whether this model is regarded as a
model of the kinetic theory of gases or of the gas itself, as a system. The char-
acterization of Hesse’s position as primarily concerned with models of systems
rather than theories (Psillos 1995) is perhaps not so accurate, given the funda-
mental importance of the neutral analogy in rendering the theory predictive. That
point aside, and more important, we can perhaps say the following: All systems of
interest to science, whether observable or unobservable, are represented (or,
better, representable), and whether we call this representation a ‘‘theory’’ or
‘‘model’’ is less signiﬁcant than the nature of the representation itself. The ‘‘be-
havior’’ of gas atoms, for example, gets represented within the kinetic theory of
gases, which, from a formal standpoint, incorporates, or has embedded within it,
an empirical substructure isomorphic to some ‘‘phenomenological’’ model of gas-
es. The ‘‘billiard ball’’ model may be regarded as incorporating the same, or a
relevantly similar, empirical substructure that effectively ‘‘forces’’ partial similarity
at the higher theoretical level.
      22. See, for example, Cifuentes 1992, pp. 24–25. Again, Apostel introduces
several forms of ‘‘approximate’’ isomorphism (1961, pp. 17–21). In particular, in
his ‘‘Approximation IV’’ he introduces the notion of an ‘‘indetermination domain’’
for relations, where this is explicated in terms of ‘‘couples for which it is not
decidable if they belong to a relation or not’’ (1961, p. 18; Apostel also introduces
indetermination domains for the sets, where the former are understood as ele-
ments for which it is not decidable whether they belong to the set or not. This
bears a strong resemblance to the more recent notion of a ‘‘qua-set’’ (see Dalla
Chiara and Toraldo di Francia 1993). Although Apostel notes the ‘‘interesting
complexities’’ that result from these various kinds of approximate isomorphisms,



                                                         Notes to Pages 48–49 207
he fails to develop their possible applications within the philosophy of science
(although he does use them to develop notions of ‘‘approximate satisfaction’’
[1961, pp. 24–26]). Czarnocka also introduces the notion of a ‘‘quasi-isomorphism’’
in a similar context, and although the meaning of the term is not entirely clear, its
contrast with isomorphism, where the latter ensures ‘‘cognitive comfort’’ and the
‘‘lack of sceptical doubts’’ suggests a close resemblance with the idea expressed
here (Czarnocka 1995, p. 31). Needless to say, the idea of ‘‘partial isomorphism’’
as holding between partial structures was developed in complete ignorance of
these similar notions.
      23. For further discussion of Giere’s use of this term, see French and
Ladyman 1999.
      24. Cf. Bunge’s set-theoretic account of the ‘‘several degrees of formal anal-
ogy’’ (Bunge 1973, p. 115). ‘‘Isomorphism is . . . perfect formal analogy’’ (p. 115),
and what we have called ‘‘partial isomorphism’’ Bunge terms ‘‘plain (or some-
some) formal analogy’’ (p. 115).
      25. One could go further and give a quantitative account. However, the
dangers inherent in such accounts are revealed in Gorham’s attempt to represent
structural similarity as a distance relation in an appropriate n-dimensional space
(Gorham 1996). Features of objects are then represented as coordinates in this
space, and Gorham imposes a hierarchy of relative importance that proceeds from
the ‘‘ontological’’ (as most important), to the ‘‘nomological’’ and then the
‘‘mathematical’’ (as least important). Now, one could obviously propose an al-
ternative hierarchy or question whether the mathematical, say, can be separated
quite so cleanly from the ‘‘nomological.’’ However, the real problems arise when
Gorham applies this metric to the issue of verisimilitude and concludes that the
overall ‘‘dissimilarity’’ between the Thomson and Bohr models of the atom is 37%,
whereas that between the Rutherford and Bohr models is only 26%; hence the
Rutherford model is closer to the truth than Thomson’s. First of all, it is explicitly
assumed that the Bohr model is true, and this raises the issue as to how an
apparently inconsistent model might be regarded as true, an issue we address in
chapter 5. Second, the calculation of these particular percentages is crucially
dependent on an assignment of a distance of 0.5 with regard to the nomological
features of the Rutherford and Bohr models, since although they agree on the law
governing the motions of electrons within orbits, the Bohr model also incorporates
the quantum condition. But of course, one could insist that the latter precisely
represents the ‘‘quantum jump’’ (excuse the pun) between classical models like
Thomson’s and Rutherford’s and quantum models like those of Bohr and Som-
merfeld. Assigning a greater distance on account of the quantum condition would
yield a correspondingly greater dissimilarity between the Rutherford and Bohr
models, putting the Thomson and Rutherford models closer together. Of course,
one would still have the Rutherford model closer to Bohr than the Thomson model
is, but, ﬁrst of all, one could construct cases in which the situation was not quite so
transparent, and one model might come ahead of another, depending on one
assignment of the relative importance given to certain features, and not on an-
other; second, one can reasonably conclude that the Rutherford model is more
similar to Bohr’s than Thomson’s, without having to go through a detailed nu-
merical calculation.
      26. ‘‘Formal analogy is best analyzed when the objects in question are sets,
because set theory does not specify the nature of the elements of a set. This does
not mean that formal analogy is clear only when it concerns mathematical ob-
jects: since any concrete object can be modeled as (or represented by) a set



208    Notes to Pages 49–51
endowed with a certain structure, the search for formal analogies among concrete
objects can be referred to their set representatives. If two such representatives
prove analogous, their respective referents will be pronounced formally analo-
gous’’ (Bunge 1973, p. 115).
      27. A recent and interesting example of such cross-fertilization is given by
renormalization group theory, originally developed within condensed matter phys-
ics and imported, with enormous success, into quantum ﬁeld theory; see Cao 1997.
      28. Thus Kroes’s (1989) attempt to describe structural analogies between phys-
ical systems is too narrow, since he regards two such systems as analogous if the
relevant mathematical equations have the same form. He goes on to represent this
kind of structural analogy set-theoretically, in terms of isomorphisms holding be-
tween the relevant structures, and thus our approach can be seen as far more general.
      29. ‘‘Among the glaring mistakes that can easily be avoided by taking our
framework into account, the following may be mentioned: (a) mistaking analogy
for the far stronger (transitive) relation of equivalence; (b) speaking of iso-
morphism (or perfect formal analogy) when a much weaker relation of similarity
(usually plain analogy) is involved’’ (Bunge 1973, p. 130).
      30. ‘‘By a physical analogy I mean that partial similarity between the laws of
one science and those of another which makes each of them illustrate the other’’
(Maxwell 1965, p. 156), quoted in Achinstein 1991, where the ‘‘partial’’ aspect
remains uncommented on. Cf. also Suppes, yet again: ‘‘Gibbs was not concerned to
appeal directly to physical reality or to establish true physical theories but rather
to construct models or theories having partial analogies to the complicated em-
pirical facts of thermodynamics and other branches of physics’’ (1961, p. 168).
      31. A conception that was obtained from Rutherford’s work, of course, and
which Bohr already had in mind from his earlier work on charged particle ab-
sorption.
      32. Bohr begins his classic three-part paper ‘‘On the Constitution of Atoms
and Molecules’’ by considering the electron orbits as elliptical, but on the next
page he introduces the assumption that they are circular (Bohr 1981, pp. 159–
233). He felt justiﬁed in this procedure on the basis of a consideration of the
general characteristics of the motion produced in Coulomb-type ﬁelds (Hoyer
1981, p. 115). These considerations are sketched on two sheets contained in the
Neils Bohr Archive and prominently involve Kepler’s third law (Bohr 1981,
pp. 250–251). It is also interesting to note the simple sketches of elliptical motion
given on the ﬁrst of these sheets, which attest to the minimal picturability en-
couraged by the analogy.
      33. Cf. Bunge’s account of hydraulic analogues of electric circuits in terms of
relational structures that capture the common structure of the two concrete
systems (1973, p. 124).
      34. For an assessment of recent developments, see Suppe (2000), who claims
that ‘‘focusing on inherent advantages of syntactic vs. semantic approaches is
fruitless. The Devil is in the details. And the details are that semantic approaches
have shown impressive philosophical advances with little distraction by artifacts of
infelicitous formalizations’’ (p. S113–S114).
      35. Again, Apostel has noted-albeit brieﬂy-that models may function as
‘‘intermediaries’’ between either theories and experience or theories and ‘‘reality’’
(1961, p. 11; see also Hutten 1953–54, p. 289). In particular, if the model is an
intermediary between two formalisms in the sense of being a model of both, then
one could use the number and kind of the relations involved to develop a form of
‘‘degree of intermediacy.’’



                                                      Notes to Pages 51–54 209
      36. Cartwright et al. (1995) give the example of London and London’s 1935
model of superconductivity, which, they claim, was constructed at the phenom-
enological level, independent of theory in methods and aims. Unfortunately,
however, their case study is interestingly inapt: Fritz London himself-one of the
more philosophically reﬂective of the new generation of quantum physicists (see
Gavroglu 1995)-insisted that the model was not phenomenological! Furthermore,
it can be shown that it was not developed in a manner that was ‘‘independent of
theory in methods and aims’’ and, further still, that its development can be
straightforwardly accommodated within the partial structures version of the se-
mantic approach (French and Ladyman 1997).
      37. Morrison (1999) presents an example from the history of ﬂuid dynamics:
Prandtl’s attempt to model ﬂuid ﬂow around objects via the introduction of a thin
boundary layer, which, it is claimed, was based directly on the relevant ‘‘phe-
nomenology.’’ It turns out, however, that the sense of ‘‘independence’’ from
theory in this case is extremely attenuated and amounts to no more than the point
that experimental considerations played an important part in the development of
the model. Once again this case study can be easily handled by the semantic
approach (da Costa and French 2000).
      38. Fisher (forthcoming) refers to such models as ‘‘developmental’’; for a
discussion of the impact of the relevant history on certain versions of the semantic
approach (but not the partial structures form, unfortunately!), see Portides (2000).
      39. Fermi-Dirac statistics correspond to the antisymmetric representation of
the permutation group, whereas Bose-Einstein statistics correspond to the sym-
metric representation. Other forms of statistics correspond to higher order rep-
resentations and played an important role in the history of the development of
quantum chromodynamics, as we shall see in chapter 6.
      40. Frisch has also pointed out that no (classical) models can be used to
represent an inconsistent theory, such as Maxwellian electrodynamics (Frisch, in
press); that the issue of inconsistency in science poses no special problems for the
Semantic Approach is argued in chapter 5.
      41. Such models include both ‘‘scale’’ and analogue models, according to
Black, ‘‘representational’’ models on Achinstein’s list and ‘‘remnant’’ models in
Downes’s critique. We might also add the biologists’ use of mice as ‘‘models’’ in
immunology research, for example; cf. Herfel (1995, pp. 75–77), who un-
fortunately confuses such ‘‘concrete’’ models with the modeling of nonlinear be-
havior on ‘‘concrete’’ computers.
      42. Another interesting example is Smeaton’s model waterwheel, which was
not a prototype or a scaled-down version of some particular waterwheel but,
according to Baird, ‘‘serves the more abstract purpose of allowing [Smeaton] to
better understand how waterwheels in general extract power from water in mo-
tion’’ (Baird 1995, p. 446). For Baird this material model carries ‘‘representational
meaning’’ and he insists on the ‘‘central point’’ that ‘‘in quite speciﬁc ways it
functioned just as theory functions’’ (p. 446). We shall discuss how this ‘‘rep-
resentational meaning’’ acts as a form of nonpropositional knowledge in the next
chapter.
      43. Of course, material models allow for a more immediate appreciation of
the spatial relationships between the elements concerned (hence the interest in
‘‘virtual’’ modeling on computers) and are central to what Nersessian calls
‘‘imagistic’’ reasoning (1993). The commonality here, in the sense of that which
links diagrams, material models, and iconic models, is the representation of
structure.



210   Notes to Pages 55–57
      44. On March 6, 1996, the Guardian newspaper reported the surprising dis-
covery that the common pipistrelle bat is in fact two distinct species. As the
newspaper reported, ‘‘Classiﬁcation experts face a delay in naming the new bat
because the original ‘type’ specimen of Pipistrellus pipistrellus went missing from
the Natural History Museum some years ago. A reserve specimen has lost its head
in storage, and scientists are not sure which type it is.’’
      45. We could press a form of type-token distinction here in the sense that
both wire-and-tinplate models of DNA and their holographic counterparts might
be regarded as tokens of the same type, with the latter delineated in terms of its
role as a representation. Shifting to an appropriately Peircean perspective, it is the
sign which is important, not the material of which it is composed. Our point is
therefore a semiotic one.
      46. Conversely, and strictly speaking, a model in the Tarskian sense is not an
object, or at least not a physical one. This would seem to be obvious, but it relates
to an important issue: whether the relationship between models and ‘‘the world’’
can be straightforwardly understood in terms of satisfaction. Thus it has been
argued that, strictly speaking, the relation of satisfaction does not and cannot hold
between a sentence and a physical object; rather, the sentence is satisﬁed in a
structure that represents ‘‘the world,’’ or an aspect thereof (see Downes 1992).
However, Tarski himself-at least in his early work-took sentences to be true in
the world. This might be understood as a ‘‘concrete’’ form of truth, corresponding
to which is the ‘‘abstract’’ form, with regard to which set theory is deployed. The
‘‘abstract’’ form can then be seen as a mathematization of the ‘‘concrete.’’ From
this latter perspective, one can say, loosely perhaps, that the relation of satisfac-
tion can hold between a sentence and ‘‘the world’’ but only if the latter is seen as
an appropriate set-theoretical structure (constructed in a set theory with Ur-
elemente). Of course, the relation of representation that is presumed to hold be-
tween the structure and the world is itself deeply problematic and remains so in
the present context, where broadly ‘‘theoretical’’ structures are related via partial
isomorphisms to equally broadly ‘‘phenomenological’’ ones and the latter ‘‘rep-
resent’’ the phenomena. We shall return to this issue in subsequent chapters, but
our point here is that scale models may be represented by such structures just as,
say, physical systems like the solar system are.
      47. Suppe understands van Fraassen as identifying a theory with one of
its phase space models and argues that while this is legitimate when quantita-
tive theories are concerned, ‘‘the Semantic Conception of Theories must distin-
guish the theory from its phase space models if its account of theories is to
apply to qualitative theories as well’’ (1989, p. 117, fn. 39). Perhaps this should
be more properly regarded as a deﬁciency of the phase space approach, rather
than an indication that the notions of theory and model must be kept separate.
Certainly it would seem that the partial structures approach can handle quan-
titative and qualitative theories on an equal footing without imposing such a
separation.
      48. Ellis, for example, has argued that we can have no ontic commitments to
a model’s constituents (1990), whereas Campbell argues, correctly, that this can’t
be quite right, otherwise the model would be of no use (1994). He then goes on to
suggest that what we must be ‘‘referential’’ about are the relationships expressed in
the model, which obviously suggests a form of ‘‘structural’’ realism, a position we
shall explore in chapter 8.
      49. Together with the underdetermination that follows from such embedding,
this consequent attitude toward theories and models renders the model-theoretic



                                                       Notes to Pages 57–59 211
approach a natural framework for the constructive empiricist. It does not follow, of
course, that one cannot adopt this approach and still be a realist.
     50. We do not use the word ‘‘similarly’’ here inadvisedly. Van Fraassen has
noted how aspects of Cartwright’s (early) views mesh quite nicely with his con-
structive empiricism (van Fraassen 1985a, 1991). However, in her more recent
work she has adopted a kind of ‘‘patchwork realism’’ that asserts that ‘‘Theory is
true only in models’’ (1995, p. 358), understood as shorthand for ‘‘The theory is
true only in those situations that resemble its models’’ (p. 358). Confusingly,
because of her emphasis on the role of models in scientiﬁc practice, she has
also been lumped together with Giere (Psillos 1995; Teller 1995, p. 4, fn. 1), who,
of course, is a realist (albeit nonstandard) advocating the model-theoretic ap-
proach, which Cartwright explicitly rejects (1995, p. 357; see also 1996 and
1999).
     51. For detailed criticisms of Cartwright’s position, see French and Lady-
man (1997) and Bueno (1997). In particular, any distinction between ‘‘theo-
retical’’ and ‘‘phenomenological’’ or, not necessarily equivalently, ‘‘abstract’’
and ‘‘concrete’’ models is undermined by the supposedly concrete examples she
appeals to: springs, pendula, and, crucially, dipole oscillators (Cartwright 1995,
p. 359).
     52. Cf. Suppes, again: ‘‘The abstract set-theoretical model of a theory will
have among its parts a basic set which will consist of the objects ordinarily
thought to constitute the physical model’’ (1961, p. 167).
     53. We are grateful to Hartmann for drawing our attention to this work; see
Hartmann (1996).
     54. It is worth recalling that Bunge represents a ‘‘model object’’ as a rela-
tional structure exactly as we have done and furthermore notes that the predicates
deﬁned on the set of elements will be satisﬁed ‘‘only approximately, if at all, by the
ultimate referents’’ (1973, p. 95). It is partly because of this latter point, of course,
that Bunge feels that ‘‘theoretical models,’’ which have such model objects as their
‘‘primitive base,’’ cannot be taken in the model-theoretic sense. However, for
Bunge a theoretical model is also a hypothetico-deductive system concerning the
model object (1973, pp. 97 and 100) and furthermore can be regarded as nothing
more than a set of statements relating certain variables (p. 102).
     55. ‘‘In the language physicists use, it is already hard to distinguish between
the meaning of ‘model’ and ‘theory.’ So, for example, the ‘Standard Model’ of the
strong-electroweak interactions is certainly considered a fundamental theory’’
(Hartmann 1995, p. 52). Another example comes from Bohr: In the ﬁrst part of
‘‘On the Constitution of Atoms and Molecules,’’ he refers to the Rutherford ‘‘atom-
model’’ (1981, pp. 161 and 162), whereas in part 3 it is called ‘‘Rutherford’s
theory of the structure of atoms’’ (p. 215).
     56. Cf. Psillos, who acknowledges the point that ‘‘theories, like models, may
also be seen as approximate, simpliﬁed and restricted descriptions/explanations of
the phenomena’’ (1995, p. 115) and accepts that ‘‘there is some leeway here’’
(p. 115). The difference between a theory and a model is then regarded as one of a
degree of belief, that in the former being higher than that in the latter (cf. Hart-
mann 1995, also). This suggests the sort of ‘‘continuum’’ view with which we are
obviously sympathetic; however, our sympathy evaporates when it comes to the
contrary claim that ‘‘the difference between a model and a theory may be seen as
an intentional one, i.e., a difference relating to our having different epistemic
attitudes towards them’’ (Psillos 1995, p. 115, fn. 6) On this point, see also
Suppes: ‘‘In old and established branches of physics which correspond well with



212    Notes to Pages 59–60
the empirical phenomena they attempt to explain, there is only a slight tendency
ever to use the word ‘model.’ . . . On the other hand, in those branches of physics
which gives as yet an inadequate account of detailed physical phenomena with
which they are concerned there is a much more frequent use of the word ‘model’’’
(Suppes 1961, pp. 168–169), and, again, ‘‘in such uses of the word ‘model’ it is to
be emphasized that there is a constant interplay between the model as a physical
or non-linguistic object and the model as a theory’’ (p. 169; cf. Achinstein 1968,
p. 215).
     57. Sticking our necks out even farther, perhaps we might suggest that all
examples of scientiﬁc ‘‘representation,’’ broadly construed, might be treated in this
way. Consider for example, diagrams of experimental apparatus: At a Leeds
seminar on the difﬁculties in reproducing Joule’s famous paddle-wheel experiment,
it was pointed out that drawings culled from Joule’s papers could not be relied
upon for the purposes of accurate reconstruction. However, this is to presume that
accurate reconstruction was the ultimate purpose of such diagrams. Rather, we
would hazard, their function was to indicate the most pertinent relationships
between the various components of the apparatus, these relationships revealing-
at least in this case-the lines of force involved. Cf. also Bunge, again: ‘‘The
representation may be pictorial, as in the case of a drawing, or conceptual, as in
the case of a mathematical formula. It may be ﬁgurative, like the ball-and-spoke
model of a molecule, or semisymbolic, as in the case of the contour map of the
same molecule; or ﬁnally symbolic like the hamiltonian operator for that same
object’’ (1973, p. 92). Nersessian, in particular, has drawn attention to the role of
images and ‘‘imagistic reasoning’’ in theory development and claims that, in the
quantitative phase of development, the image ‘‘serves primarily to make certain
structural relationships visualizable’’ (p. 24).




   Chapter 4
     1. According to the former interpretation, ‘‘x believes that p’’ is taken to be
true if x, who is supposed to be candid and after due explanation where necessary,
overtly professes to accept p as true: we ask x if she does believe p, and the issue
is decided by x’s answer. The latter construction considers that ‘‘x believes that
p’’ obtains if either x gives her assent to p, in accordance with the preceding
interpretation, or x is committed to giving assent to p in case p constitutes a
logical consequence of propositions believed by x. For further details, see Rescher
(1968).
     2. This emphasis on commitment is not uncommon in the philosophy of
science, at least; see, for example, van Fraassen 1980, p.12; Kaplan 1981; Laudan
1977, p. 108.
     3. Cf. Suppes: ‘‘I think it is true to say that most philosophers ﬁnd it easier to
talk about theories than about models of theories. The reasons for this are several,
but perhaps the most important two are the following: In the ﬁrst place, philos-
ophers’ examples of theories are usually quite simple in character, and therefore
are easy to discuss in a straightforward linguistic manner. In the second place, the
introduction of models of a theory inevitably introduces a stronger mathematical
element into the discussion’’ (1967, p. 57).
     4. As Bogdan puts it, philosophers construe the nature of propositions with
‘‘anarchic gusto’’ (1986, p. 9).



                                                       Notes to Pages 60–67 213
      5. We recall Grandy’s point: That belief reports themselves are linguistic
reﬂects only the fact that they are composed of sentences and not on the structure
of the representation that is the object of the report.
      6. That the ‘‘appearances’’ are themselves structures is an important point,
as it undermines Downes’s confused claim that the relationship between theories,
viewed as mathematical structures, and ‘‘reality,’’ regarded as nonmathematical,
cannot be explicated in terms of isomorphism (Downes 1992). However, as van
Fraassen makes clear, the isomorphism holds between one set of structures-the
empirical substructures of the theory-and another, the appearances; the ques-
tion of the relationship between the latter and reality itself (however that
is construed) is not one that the model-theoretic approach can be expected to
answer!
      7. The following discussion is based on French and Ladyman 1999.
      8. Van Fraassen gives the example of a model of the data from an Einstein-
Podolsky-Rosen experiment in quantum mechanics.
      9. ‘‘Often the characteristics which data must have to be useful as evidence
can only be purchased at the cost of tolerating a great deal of complexity and
idiosyncrasy in the causal processes which produce that data’’ (Bogen and
Woodward 1988, p. 319).
      10. Kaiser suggests this in an account which he claims runs parallel to that
of Bogen and Woodward (Kaiser 1995).
      11. Kaiser talks of ‘‘inference tickets’’ in this regard (1995).
      12. According to Suárez, a model of the phenomena models a phenomen-
ological ‘‘fact’’ (preprint, p. 5; see also Cartwright, Suárez, and Shomar 1995,
p. 139).
      13. In expressing the relevant causal relations, such models can be regarded as
explanations of the phenomena (Suárez, preprint; Cartwright, Suárez, and Shomar
1995). This ﬁts nicely within Cartwright’s Aristotelian account, which stresses that
phenomenological models can be regarded as true precisely insofar as they represent
the causal properties and ‘‘capacities’’ of the phenomena. Of course, strictly speaking
(that is, set-theoretically speaking), to talk of ‘‘true models’’ here is a façon de parler,
since it is sentences which should be regarded as true, and not nonlinguistic entities.
Cartwright herself, of course, has rejected such a set-theoretic perspective of physical
models and thus has no compunction about talking of their truth.
      14. What we have is a view of explanation in which phenomena are ex-
plained by having their properties represented within models that are then en-
meshed within a complex network of other models, in turn represented
structurally (we shall brieﬂy return to this view in chapter 9).
      15. Suggestions that this implies the ‘‘partial existence’’ of the entities con-
cerned are puerile; claims about the phenomena are to be understood as claims
about their descriptions, and what these describe are the properties of the relevant
entities.
      16. Bueno argues that it should be, and as we have already noted, van
Fraassen himself has suggested a convergence between the two notions. Again, we
wish to maintain our position of relative neutrality within this debate, although
we shall return to the issue in chapter 8.
      17. At times the argument for such a view seems to consist of nothing more
than holding up a recent issue of the Scientiﬁc American, with all its diversity of
topics covered, and insisting, ‘‘How could one ever believe that all these subjects,
from the structure of a ﬂy’s eye to the ability to break bricks with a karate chop,
could be explained in terms of theoretical physics?’’



214    Notes to Pages 67–75
      18. Noting that the notion of ‘‘incomplete’’ or ‘‘nonfundamental’’ theories
has not received the attention it deserves in the philosophy of science, Shapere
suggests that arguments to the effect that no theory could ever be complete do not
tell the whole story: ‘‘Suppose we had a theory which over a period of six
thousand years was successful in answering all questions that were posed to it.
Despite the correctness of the above-mentioned logical point, I expect that people
would begin to suppose that they had a ‘complete’ and perhaps even a ‘funda-
mental’ theory’’ (Shapere 1969, p. 147 fn. 38).
      19. Fuller has criticized Hardwig on the grounds that he establishes only that
if expertise is relevant, we should defer to the authority of experts but fails to deal
with the crucial normative question of when expertise is relevant (Fuller, 1986).
Consideration of the latter question leads to the suggestion that there may in fact
be rational grounds for rejecting the authority of experts and thinking for oneself
(p. 279). Pierson has recently attempted a reconciliation by distinguishing be-
tween ‘‘closed-system oriented’’ expertise and ‘‘layperson oriented’’ expertise: With
regard to the former, the layperson should defer to the experts, but when it comes
to the latter, where a determination must be made as to whether the beneﬁt of
following the experts’ advice is cost-effective, she is rationally obliged to think for
herself (Pierson 1995). Interestingly, Pierson notes that some of the confusion
over this issue may arise because of the use of the notion of ‘‘testimony’’ to
describe the cognitive relationships in question and that Quinton has situated this
notion within a model of knowledge in which there are distinct atomic facts that
speak for themselves (Quinton 1982)-that is, a model in which all our beliefs are
‘‘factual.’’
      20. Cf. Schiffer, who proposes ‘‘harmlessly’’ to represent propositions as
‘‘ordered n-tuples of the things which determine them’’ (1986, pp. 86–87). Of
course, for Schiffer ‘‘the real trouble with propositions’’ has to do less with their
ontological status than with the claim that belief involves a relation to them; we
shall not pursue this issue here.
      21. For a response that argues that possible worlds need not be regarded as
‘‘complete’’ in a problematic sense, see Stalnaker (1986). Of course, possible
worlds semantics is also given a model-theoretic formulation, although here the
sets are sets of possible worlds rather than individuals.
      22. Of course, Cartwright and Baird, although perhaps not Giere, would be
unhappy with this attempt to give a unitary account of both ‘‘instrumental’’ and
‘‘theoretical’’ knowledge. However, their efforts to force a distinction between the
two are predicated on an incorrect characterization of the latter as entirely prop-
ositional.
      23. As is well known, Vaihinger also espoused a philosophy of ‘‘the as-if’’
and maintained that although all elements of knowledge except sensations were
mere ﬁctions, it was nevertheless useful to act as if they were true. The standard
objection to this view is that in demanding that one acts as if a proposition were
true, it presupposes a (nonﬁctionalist) notion of truth. Vaihinger’s work is often
linked with the pragmatists’, but we must be candid and admit that we ﬁnd the
latter to be much clearer and better developed. Having said that, Fine has recently
attempted to resurrect Vaihinger’s approach and render it more attractive in the
modern context (Fine 1998).
      24. It is here, of course, that, with respect to the attribution of belief states,
the behaviorist gains a toehold.
      25. Cf. van Fraassen: ‘‘In practice, acceptance will always be partial and
more or less tentative’’ (1985a, p. 281).



                                                        Notes to Pages 75–83 215
   Chapter 5
      1. ‘‘Incongruent suppositions’’ can be thought of as those aspects of scientiﬁc
and everyday belief structures that, when rendered less vague and more precise,
can be represented as inconsistencies.
      2. See, for example, Gotesky’s clear and comprehensive review of ‘‘un-
avoidable’’ inconsistencies in moral, ‘‘theoretical,’’ ‘‘factual,’’ psychological, and
‘‘existential’’ situations (Gotesky 1968).
      3. Of course, we recognize that it is debatable whether this example, like the
others, is actually inconsistent (see, for example, Rescher 1973); indeed, focusing
on the example of Bohr’s theory of the atom, it is our intention in this chapter to
contribute to the debate.
      4. ‘‘It [the requirement of consistency] can be regarded as the ﬁrst of the re-
quirements to be satisﬁed by every theoretical system, be it empirical or non-
empirical’’ (Popper 1972, p. 92). One might speculate here on the inﬂuence of
Hilbert’s attempt to ensure the safety and certitude of mathematical practice by
developing appropriate consistency proofs, following the appearance of the set-
theoretical paradoxes. If we note Popper’s emphasis on the axiomatization of phys-
ical theories, in precisely and explicitly Hilbert’s sense, with the ﬁrst ‘‘fundamental
requirement’’ being that the axioms must be free from contradiction, whether self-
or mutual, then the speculation becomes less idle (Popper 1972, p. 71).
      5. There is a common perception that there can be no models of sets of
inconsistent sentences, if models are understood as structures in which the rel-
evant sentences are true, in the Tarskian sense. However, a paraconsistent theory
of models can in fact be constructed; see Alves 1984 and da Costa, Béziau, and
Bueno 1997.
      6. What the principle of contradiction is taken to be is an interesting issue.
We can distinguish the following nonequivalent formulations: Of two contra-
dictory propositions, one is false; (p & p); and a predicate cannot simultaneously
belong and not belong to the same subject (da Costa and Marconi 1987, p. 2).
      7. The claim is based on a reading of the Second Analytics (A11, 77a 10–22).
Aristotle is better known for arguing that, ontologically, contradictions are im-
possible and, practically, prevent effective communication and social interaction
(for a recent discussion of Aristotle’s defense of the principle of noncontradiction
on the grounds that the ontological consequences of its negation would be un-
acceptable, see Cassini 1990). As in the case of many recent works on this issue,
the present chapter is an attempt to demonstrate that this latter claim is un-
founded (see also Gotesky 1968).
      8. Thus Moseley wrote, ‘‘I believe that when we really know what an atom
is, as we must within a few years, your theory even if wrong in detail will deserve
much of the credit’’ (cited in Bohr 1981, pp. 545–546). Ehrenfest was, char-
acteristically perhaps, much more negative, writing that ‘‘Bohr’s work . . . has
driven me to despair. If this is the way to reach the goal I must give up doing
physics’’ (Klein 1970, p. 278) and referring to the ‘‘completely monstrous Bohr
model’’ (p. 286).
      9. Einstein said of Bohr: ‘‘He utters his opinions like one perpetually groping
and never like one who believes he is in possession of deﬁnite truth’’ (quoted on
the frontispiece of Pais 1991).
      10. Schotch considers the denomination ‘‘nonadjunctive’’ as unfortunate,
since this approach represents a generalization of the classical rule of adjunction
(Schotch 1993, p. 425 fn. 14).



216    Notes to Pages 84–88
     11. Pais refers to Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom as a ‘‘Triumph over
logic’’ (1991, p. 146).
     12. The remark comes from a 1914 letter to Oseen, reporting Bohr’s dis-
cussion with Debye.
     13. It perhaps needs pointing out that the empirical support for Bohr’s theory
was extremely strong. Pais, for example, notes that the ‘‘capstone’’ of Bohr’s work
on the Balmer formula for the spectrum of atomic hydrogen is represented by his
theoretical account of the so-called Pickering lines, which Bohr ascribed to singly
ionized helium. When it was objected that Bohr’s account failed to ﬁt the data,
Bohr responded that his theory was based on an approximation in which the
nucleus was treated as inﬁnitely heavy compared with the electron and that with
more realistic masses included, ‘‘exact agreement’’ with the data was obtained. As
Pais says, ‘‘Up to that time no one had ever produced anything like it in the realm
of spectroscopy, agreement between theory and experiment to ﬁve signiﬁcant
ﬁgures’’ (1991, p. 149).
     14. Von Laue is recorded as exclaiming, ‘‘This is all nonsense! Maxwell’s
equations are valid under all circumstances. An electron in a circular orbit must
emit radiation’’ (Jammer 1966, p. 86). Einstein, on the other hand, said, at the
very same occasion (which was a joint physics colloquium of the University and
Institute of Technology in Zurich), ‘‘Very remarkable! There must be something
behind it. I do not believe that the derivation of the absolute value of the Rydberg
constant is purely fortuitous’’ (Jammer 1966, p. 86).
     15. Sommerfeld, of course, greatly extended Bohr’s theory, and, indeed, the
theory came to be known as the ‘‘Bohr-Sommerfeld theory of atomic structure’’
(Mehra and Rechenberg 1982, Vol. 1, part 1; pp. 1:155–257). Interestingly,
Sommerfeld’s previous work on the dispersion of light in gases was criticized by
Oseen in a letter to Bohr for being inconsistent, since it was based on Bohr’s model
together with Lorentz’s theory of the electron (Bohr 1981, p. 337). In reply, Bohr
also rejected Sommerfeld’s dispersion theory but on experimental and theoretical
grounds (Bohr 1981, p. 337).
     16. Hettema seems to miss the point when writing that, ‘‘arguably, the Bohr
theory is not inconsistent with the Maxwell-Lorentz theory, in that it uses a much
lesser portion of the Maxwell-Lorentz theory than Lakatos contends’’ (1995,
p. 323; cf. Bartelborth 1989). Hettema is correct is claiming that Lakatos over-
states his case when he asserts that Bohr’s program was ‘‘grafted’’ onto Maxwell-
Lorentz electrodynamics, since, as Brown notes, Bohr separated the frequency of
the emitted radiation from the frequency of the periodic motion of the electrons in
the atom, with quantum mechanics applying to the former and classical me-
chanics to the latter (Hettema 1995, p. 314). Nevertheless, the posited stability of
the ground state is in direct conﬂict with a fundamental component of classical
electrodynamics-namely, that accelerating charges radiate.
     17. In response to Oseen’s demand for a ‘‘clear logic which always re-
members what the basic assumptions are, and which never combines them with
opposite assumptions for the sake of accidental progress’’ (Bohr 1981, pp. 340 and
571), Bohr wrote, ‘‘As you, I feel very much indeed that a logical critic [of
quantum theory] is very much needed, but I think I take a more optimistic view on
the Quantum Theory than you. In fact, I have written a paper in which I have
made an attempt to show that the assumptions of the theory can be put on a
logical consistent form, which covers all the different kinds [of] applications (by
this I mean all applications which assume a discontinuous distribution of the
possible (stationary) states; but I do not think that a theory of the Planck type can



                                                      Notes to Pages 88–92 217
be made logical consistent)’’ (Bohr 1981, 571). After receiving copies of Som-
merfeld’s work, Bohr abandoned the publication of the paper he mentions, al-
though it was incorporated in his 1918 account of the quantum theory of line
spectra (1981, pp. 342 and 572). In his letter to Sommerfeld, Bohr makes it clear
that the ‘‘logically consistent form’’ of which he speaks was based on Ehrenfest’s
‘‘adiabatic principle’’ (p. 604); for a consideration of the role of this principle
within the nonadjunctive framework, see Brown (1993, pp. 401–402).
      18. According to Havas, complementarity is to be understood as ‘‘real dia-
lectical contradiction’’ in the Hegelian sense (1993, p. 33). Perhaps it is because of
this sort of understanding that Priest chose Bohr’s theory as an example of one of
his ‘‘dialethias’’ but if regarding Bohr’s atomic model as true is questionable,
viewing the whole complementarity interpretation of quantum mechanics simi-
larly is even more so.
      19. Presumably Heisenberg is referring to ‘‘classical’’ logic here.
      20. Of course, this is not to deny the existence of certain commonalities
between the ‘‘old’’ and ‘‘new’’ quantum theories and the heuristic moves that
were based on these common elements.
      21. Here Norton gives examples of symmetry considerations functioning in
this way at the metalevel; for further discussion of the fundamental heuristic role
of symmetry and invariance principles, see Post 1971.
      22. Thus, insofar as these different formulations of Newtonian cosmology are
underdetermined by the evidence, Norton advocates avoidance of inconsistency as
a methodological principle for breaking the underdetermination. Such a principle
might be more appealing to the realist than the antirealist, of course.
      23. Smith calls a set of statements in general a ‘‘proposal’’ and by ‘‘theory’’
means a proposal and its deductive closure (Smith 1988b, p. 429, fn. 1). This
reluctance to assign the honoriﬁc ‘‘theory’’ to inconsistent representations crops
up elsewhere in the philosophy of science. Thus Madan suggests that an objective
of economics and the social sciences, but crucially not of science itself, might be to
ﬁnd ‘‘maximally inconsistent,’’ factually adequate ‘‘arguments’’ (Madan 1983).
Such an objective is rational, given the volatility of the economic environment, for
example, where propositions are to be regarded as strictly false of the actual world
but ‘‘true enough’’ to warrant attention.
      24. That the scientiﬁc community at the time was aware of the incon-
sistencies involved is revealed in the following passage from a beginning graduate
textbook: ‘‘It is difﬁcult, in fact it is not too much to say that at present it appears
impossible, to reconcile the divergent claims of the photoelectric and the inter-
ference groups of phenomena. The energy of the radiation behaves as though it
possessed at the same time the opposite properties of extension and localization. At
present there seems no obvious escape from the conclusion that the ordinary
formulation of the geometrical propagation involves a logical contradiction, and it
may be that it is impossible consistently to describe the spacial distribution of
radiation in terms of three dimensional geometry’’ (Richardson 1916, pp. 507–
508; Richardson was well known for his work on the thermal emission of elec-
trons, eventually winning the Nobel Prize, and we are grateful to Knudsen’s study
for drawing our attention to this passage (Knudsen, forthcoming).
      25. Smith notes that at the 1911 Solvay conference Poincaré expressed his
concern over the use of contradictory principles in such derivations, pointing out
the logical anarchy that (classically) results (Smith 1988b, p. 431 fn. 10; Poin-
caré’s remarks are recorded in Langevin and de Broglie 1912, p. 451). Gotesky
records that Poincaré also said that contradiction is the ‘‘prime stimulus’’ for



218    Notes to Pages 92–96
scientiﬁc research (Gotesky 1968, p. 490); these two aspects of Poincaré’s thought
are not necessarily inconsistent, of course!
     26. An explicit belief is one which involves an explicit mental repre-
sentation whose content is the content of the belief; ‘‘implicit’’ beliefs are not
held explicitly but are ‘‘easily inferrable’’ from explicit beliefs (Harman 1986,
p. 13).
     27. Harman is not the only one to suggest doing away with closure: Kyburg,
long an opponent of ‘‘conjunctivitis’’ (the view that to believe or accept each of a
number of beliefs is to believe or accept their conjunction) has also concluded, ‘‘It
is not the strict inconsistency of the rational corpus that leads to trouble-it is the
imposition of deductive closure’’ (Kyburg 1987, p. 147). Smith’s notion of self-
consistent subsets was also preﬁgured by Kyburg with his notion of ‘‘strands’’
(1987, p. 146 and 1974).
     28. Harman also rejects the ‘‘Logical Inconsistency Principle’’ because of the
ubiquity of inconsistency and concludes that in the event that we ﬁnd ourselves
holding inconsistent beliefs ‘‘it is rational simply to retain the contradictory beliefs,
trying not to exploit the inconsistency’’ (1986, p. 17). How we are to avoid
exploiting the inconsistency is not explained, however, and Smith’s account does
at least have the virtue of indicating how this might be achieved in speciﬁc cases.
     29. ‘‘Acceptance in the sense I am describing (like belief) is closed under
combination of contexts’’ (Brown 1990, p. 287). It is this which, according to
Brown, distinguishes a ‘‘realist’’ form of acceptance from the ‘‘instrumental’’
variety, where there is no such closure.
     30. Mele, for example, regards exclusivity as a special feature of belief that
distinguishes it from, say, desire (Mele 1987, p. 4).
     31. In some philosophical accounts, these states are regarded as distinct
(Martin 1986; Rorty 1972).
     32. Cf. Rescher and Brandom, who claim that even if our ‘‘object’’ theory is
inconsistent, our ‘‘metatheory’’ should be consistent (Rescher and Brandom,
1980, pp. 136–141). Also cf. Priest, who denies the distinction between ‘‘object’’
and ‘‘meta’’ theory but accepts that truth should be exclusive on the grounds that
contradictions should not be multiplied beyond necessity (1987).
     33. The result is self-deception; see da Costa and French 1990b.
     34. Laymon captures the sense of idealization at play here through the use of
‘‘Scott domains’’ (1987).
     35. Cf. Gotesky on ‘‘internal’’ and ‘‘external’’ contradictions (1968, p. 484).
     36. Interestingly, Apostel notes that his ‘‘partial models’’ (see chapter 3, fn.
20) may be inconsistent with each other and suggests (although he does not
develop this in detail) that this may accommodate the use of ‘‘locally inconsistent’’
models in science, such as Rutherford’s model of the nucleus (1961, p. 6).
     37. ‘‘If one ﬁnds oneself holding two mutually inconsistent ideas and re-
luctant to give up either, there is a natural fallback position which consists in
giving one of them a semi-propositional form’’ (Sperber 1982, p. 170).
     38. ‘‘[Semipropositional representations] play a role not only as temporary
steps towards full propositionality but also as sources of suggestion in creative
thinking’’ (Sperber 1982, p. 171).
     39. Cf. Popper: ‘‘The initial stage, the act of conceiving or inventing a theory,
seems to me neither to call for logical analysis nor to be susceptible of it’’ (Popper
1972, p. 31).
     40. For a recent response to such claims, see Koertge 1993, which also drew
our attention to the Reichenbach quotes here.



                                                       Notes to Pages 96–103 219
      41. Thus from the philosophers’ perspective the distinction can be regarded
as a kind of ‘‘semipermeable’’ membrane (Koertge 1993).
      42. That Einstein, for example, saw the heuristic fertility of inconsistency is
nicely revealed by the following passage in the diaries of Count Kessler: ‘‘I talked for
quite a while to Albert Einstein at a banker’s jubilee banquet where we both felt
rather out of place. In reply to my question what problem he was working on now,
he said he was engaged in thinking. Giving thought to any scientiﬁc proposition
almost invariably brought progress with it. For, without exception, every scientiﬁc
proposition was wrong. That was due to human inadequacy of thought and in-
ability to comprehend nature, so that every abstract formulation about it was
always inconsistent somewhere. Therefore every time he checked a scientiﬁc
proposition his previous acceptance of it broke down and led to a new, more precise
formulation. This was again inconsistent in some respects and consequently re-
sulted in fresh formulations, and so on indeﬁnitely’’ (quote in Stachel 1983, p. 96).
      43. Priest claims that the application of Gödel’s ﬁrst incompleteness theorem
to the ‘‘naive’’ notion of proof constitutes a further argument for dialetheism be-
cause it shows that our naive proof procedures are inconsistent (1987, pp. 49–63).
If we insist that naive proof theory be consistent, then we must accept a certain
incompleteness, either expressive or proof-theoretic.
      44. Thus Hacking writes of his ‘‘Argentine fantasy’’: ‘‘God did not write a
Book of Nature of the sort that the old Europeans imagined. He wrote a Borgesian
library, each book of which is as brief as possible, yet each book of which is
inconsistent with every other. No book is redundant. For every book, there is some
humanly accessible bit of Nature such that book, and no other, makes possible the
comprehension, prediction and inﬂuencing of what is going on. Far from being
untidy, this is New World Leibnizianism. Leibniz said that God chose a world
which maximized the variety of phenomena while choosing the simplest laws.
Exactly so: but the best way to maximize phenomena and have the simplest laws is
to have the laws inconsistent with each other, each applying to this or that but
none applying to all’’ (Hacking 1983, p. 219). This ‘‘fantasy’’ can be seen as one
aspect of the ‘‘disuniﬁcation’’ tendency in recent philosophy of science, noted in
the previous chapter.
      45. ‘‘The projected theory serves as a guide for the search for the material
content of the proper replacement for the original inconsistent proposal’’ (Smith
1988b, p. 443). Not surprisingly, Norton suggests a similar strategy; see Norton
1993, p. 417.
      46. For an indication of a nonadjunctive account of heuristics, see Brown
1993, p. 408.
      47. Immediately before this passage, Post quotes Bradley: ‘‘The knowledge of
privation like all other knowledge, in the end is positive. You cannot speak of the
absent and lacking unless you assume some ﬁeld and some presence elsewhere’’
(Bradley 1962, p. 457).
      48. Cf. p. 444, where Smith rejects talk of the ‘‘outright acceptance’’ of
conﬂicting representations.
      49. In considering the claim (made by Donovan, Laudan, and Laudan 1988)
that theory appraisal may be favorable even when scientists do not ‘‘fully’’ believe
the theory, Hettema writes: ‘‘Since the ‘old’ quantum theory of the atom was a
theory in full and very rapid development, it is difﬁcult to assess whether theorists
and experimentalists ‘believed’ the theory. I would like to distinguish between a
pragmatic notion of belief and a principled notion of belief, ‘pragmatic belief’
designating the belief that a particular solution to a problem works in that it yields



220    Notes to Pages 103–105
the right solution to that problem, ‘principled belief’ designating that the believer
thinks it is true (for some theory of truth). The answer to the question of ‘belief’ in
the old quantum theory then reads YES for the pragmatic, NO for the principled
version of belief’’ (Hettema 1995, p. 322).
      50. As Stalnaker points out, ‘‘a person may accept a proposition for the
moment without the expectation that he will continue to accept it for very long. If
a person expects a particular one of his beliefs to be overturned, he has already
begun to lose it, but an assumption he makes may be quite explicitly temporary,
and he may presume that something is true even when expecting to be contra-
dicted’’ (Stalnaker 1987, p. 80; by ‘‘beliefs’’ in this context, we, of course, un-
derstand factual beliefs, whereas the ‘‘assumptions’’ Stalnaker talks of are more
properly regarded as semipropositional).
      51. The death knell came in 1925, when Pauli noted that the application of
the ‘‘old’’ quantum theory-in particular, the adiabatic principle-to the hydro-
gen atom in crossed electric and magnetic ﬁelds resulted in the conversion of
allowed states into forbidden ones (Brown 1993, p. 401; Mehra and Rechenberg
1982, 1:485–509).
      52. Hettema has argued that Lakatos’s rational reconstruction, although
broadly correct, is deﬁcient in the details, such as the claim that Bohr’s initial
problem was the radiative instability of the Rutherford atom, whereas it was, in
fact, its mechanical instability. Thus, ‘‘In his rational reconstruction Lakatos sacri-
ﬁces a lot of historical and philosophical accuracy on the altar of liveliness’’ (1995,
p. 323). Folse also emphasizes Bohr’s concern with mechanical stability but
maintains that his theory can still be regarded as inconsistent (1985).
      53. ‘‘In the heuristic situation of empirical science, truth does not descend
deductively from the (highly fallible) most general laws, but ascends inductively
from the more modest lower reaches of the deductive structure of the theory held
at any one time. Even that infra-structure has to be pruned, and the remaining
core is never true for certain, but the modiﬁcations forced on us still allow us to
refer to that part of the theory as having a likeness to truth’’ (Post 1971, p. 254).


   Chapter 6
     1. Although how decisive a break this was has been disputed in recent ac-
counts that highlight the similarities between Carnap’s and Kuhn’s views of sci-
ence; see, for example, Reisch 1991 and Irzik and Grünberg 1995.
     2. Masterman identiﬁed the notion of an exemplar with that of a kind of
analogy (1970), and Kuhn himself talked of a ‘‘shared model-theoretic element’’
in his and van Fraassen’s work (Kuhn 1993). As he also noted, his philosophy of
science was subsequently given a formalized treatment in the work of the struc-
turalists.
     3. At the 1991 MIT conference dedicated to his work, Kuhn himself stood up
in the audience at one point and expressed how much he lamented this inﬂuence,
which, he maintained (somewhat disingenuously perhaps, given the content of
the Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions [1970]), was the result of a profound mis-
understanding of his views.
     4. In providing a conception of the relationship between theories and phe-
nomena that, Kuhn believed, was closer to scientiﬁc practice, this notion also
marks off a crucial distinction from Carnap’s view of theories; see Irzik and
Grünberg 1995, p. 298. Kuhn himself asserts that ‘‘the paradigm as shared



                                                     Notes to Pages 105–108 221
example is the central element of what I now take to be the most novel and least
understood aspect of this book’’ (1993, p. 187). Given Kuhn’s own subsequent
identiﬁcation of a model-theoretic element in his work (see n. 2), it is worth noting
that a model-based understanding of the paradigm-as-exemplar can be found in
Hutten, for example: ‘‘Whenever we encounter a new situation, we try to orient
ourselves by comparing it to a familiar situation and so to evaluate it. From this
attitude arises the normative function of the model, or the model as ideal and
paradigm, e.g. the model house’’ (1953–54, p. 286).
     5. The inﬂuence of Wittgenstein both directly on the sociology of scientiﬁc
knowledge and indirectly through Kuhn is, of course, central; see, for example,
Bloor 1983 and the recent debate between Bloor and Lynch (Bloor 1992; Lynch
1992a and 1992b).
     6. The characterization of science in terms of a conceptual network is due to
Hesse (1980).
     7. ‘‘The production of new scientiﬁc knowledge entails seeing new situations
as being relevantly like old ones’’ (Pickering 1992, p. 4).
     8. Fuller suggests that there is much less emphasis within the sociology of
science on the way in which this open-endedness is also the source of error and
misunderstanding in science (Fuller 1986, chapter 5). For a very different per-
spective, see van Fraassen 1991, p. 11, where science is portrayed as an ‘‘open text.’’
     9. The term ‘‘closure’’ is also to be found in Kuhn (1970).
     10. Gremmen refers to this as the ‘‘bucket’’ view of practice, in the sense that
everything is thrown into the bucket (Gremmen 1995). When it comes to this
second respect in particular, Hacking’s inﬂuence cannot be understated and is made
explicit in Pickering 1992. It is through Hacking and this antireductionist emphasis
on heterogeneity that the connection can be made with Cartwright, of course.
     11. The shift over this attitude toward ‘‘the social’’ as one passes from the
sociology of scientiﬁc knowledge to that of scientiﬁc practice, and the vehemence
with which it is resisted is nicely documented in the collection presented in
Pickering 1992.
     12. Again the baleful inﬂuence of Wittgenstein can be felt here: ‘‘We must do
away with all explanation, and description alone must take its place’’ (Wittgenstein
1958, §109; this passage is cited by Lynch 1992a, p. 246).
     13. One of the criticisms of the ‘‘old’’ sociology of scientiﬁc knowledge is that
this supposedly radical shift has taken ‘‘us’’ back toward the more conventional
and conservative history and philosophy of science; see Collins and Yearley 1992.
     14. ‘‘Scientiﬁc culture, then, itself appears as a wild kind of machine built
from radically heterogeneous parts, a supercyborg, harnessing material and dis-
ciplinary agency in material and human performances, some of which lead out
into the world of representation, of facts and theories’’ (Pickering 1995b, p. 446).
     15. The ‘‘dialectic’’ of resistance and accommodation is what Pickering refers
to as the ‘‘mangle of practice’’ (1995a).
     16. Earlier he claims, ‘‘At stake here . . . is the idea that the conceptual
stratum of scientiﬁc culture is itself multiple rather than monolithic, and that
many disparate layers of conceptualizations, models, approximation techniques,
and so on have typically to be linked together in bringing experiment into relation
with the higher levels of theory’’ (Pickering 1995a, p. 99), and ‘‘data and theory
have no necessary connection to one another; such connections as exist between
them have to be made . . . [and] . . . conceptual practice aims at making associa-
tions (translations, alignments) between such diverse elements-here, data and
theory’’ (Pickering 1995a, pp. 117–118).



222    Notes to Pages 108–111
     17. Pickering uses as his case study Hamilton’s development of quaternions
(Pickering and Stephanides 1992; Pickering 1995a, chapter 4; see also his 1995b,
which is a slightly rewritten version of the former); for alternative, albeit far less
detailed, perspectives on this history, see Anderson and Joshi 1993 and O’Neill
1986; the former notes the role of analogy in particular.
     18. Cf. Post, whose account of heuristics carries an explicit anti-Kuhnian
and, in general, cumulativist message: ‘‘It is not the case that we rearrange the
data within [the old theory] into a new pattern. The pattern is preserved. No
insight into why the old theory worked is lost by the new. We have sliced off some
very high levels and substituted some new ones, but the low (particularly classi-
ﬁcatory) levels remain undisturbed within their conﬁrmed ranges of validity’’ (Post
1971, p. 229).
     19. In the case of Pickering’s example of quaternions, the source of these
resistances are primarily mathematical in character.
     20. Flanagan feels that this talk of ‘‘passivity’’ is ‘‘unnecessarily provocative,
taking the decentering of the subject too far, and pressing too hard to avoid
appearing in any way aligned with the voluntarist self of the humanist’’ (Flanagan
1995, p. 470). Pickering’s reply emphasizes the autonomy of ‘‘disciplinary
agency’’ in that the effects of a discipline cannot be understood in terms of the
standard voluntarist idea of ‘‘self-originating’’ human agency (Pickering 1995c,
p. 478).
     21. A critique of this approach from the perspective of the ‘‘old’’ sociology of
scientiﬁc knowledge is given by Collins and Yearley 1992. An interesting point
they make is how this idea of nonhuman agency arises from the methodology of
the project, which they characterize as ‘‘observation informed by the perspective of
the estranged visitor’’ (1992, p. 311). If you fail to understand what is going on in
the laboratory around you and, indeed, if this lack of understanding is built in to
your very methodology, then it is not surprising that you will come to regard the
machines and apparatus of the laboratory-the ‘‘inscription devices’’-as auton-
omous agents. There is, perhaps, a deeper point: Underlying this autonomy-this
independence of the machinic-is the heterogeneity of practice. And of course,
from the perspective of the ‘‘estranged visitor’’ who makes a point of not under-
standing what is going on (who in her quest for a metaphysically balanced posi-
tion refuses even to countenance talk of what is ‘‘really’’ going on), practice will be
‘‘patchy,’’ with different ‘‘agents’’ interacting in different ways and at different
levels. The heterogeneity and hence the autonomy is a function of the method-
ology. Someone who adopts an ‘‘interpretative approach’’ (Collins and Yearley
1992) and who attempts to grasp the viewpoint(s) of the practitioners (and here
Latour et al. might well accuse us of begging the question) will be much less likely
to see heterogeneity and autonomy, as they understand the hidden purposes and
interrelationships.
     22. In Constructing Quarks, Pickering writes that ‘‘the most striking feature of
the conceptual development of [high-energy physics] is that it proceeded through
a process of modelling or analogy’’ (1984, p. 12) and in a footnote (fn. 12, p. 19)
cites Hesse’s work, among others.
     23. ‘‘Every single element or stratum of scientiﬁc culture-material, con-
ceptual, social-is revisable in practice: the material contours of machines and
instruments and their performances; facts, theories and mathematical formalisms;
the scale of social actors and their relations with one another; skills, disciplines,
plans and intentions; norms, standards, rules; you name it. All of these evolve open-
endedly into the future’’ (Pickering 1995d, p. 415; our emphasis).



                                                     Notes to Pages 112–114 223
       24. Cf. 1995b, p. 441, where Pickering talks of human agency ‘‘traditionally
conceived’’ and also (1995d), where he talks of human agency ‘‘in the traditional
voluntarist sense . . . and in other ways besides’’ (p. 414).
       25. Again, we ﬁnd this view expressed in Kuhn 1970, p. 119, as noted by
Nersessian in a paper that addresses many of the issues touched on here from the
perspective of a ‘‘cognitive’’ approach (1993, p. 11).
       26. Cf. ‘‘Scientiﬁc choice is in principle irreducible and open, but historically,
options are foreclosed according to the opportunities perceived for future practice’’
(Pickering 1984, p. 405).
       27. Cf. McMullin, who notes that the opportunities offered by theory are to
be found ‘‘primarily in the model associated with the theory, a postulated ex-
planatory structure whose elements are capable of further imaginative develop-
ment’’ (1976, p. 427).
       28. ‘‘There is no algorithm that determines the vectors of cultural extension,
which is as much as to say that the goals of scientiﬁc practice emerge in the real
time of practice’’ (Pickering 1995a, pp. 19–20) Nevertheless, as previously noted
there is at least some ‘‘predisciplining,’’ even if it is only partial, and here when the
moves are ‘‘forced,’’ ‘‘the ‘disciplined’ human is indeed an algorithmic actor
or . . . a machinelike actor who performs predictably in a given situation’’ (1995c,
p. 478). This is particularly so in the case of mathematical practice, which, as
Pickering notes, is strikingly machinelike and algorithmic.
       29. The difference may be denoted, although not, perhaps, clariﬁed by Ryle’s
distinction between ‘‘Procrustean’’ and ‘‘canonical’’ rules (Ryle 1971, pp. 230–
231).
       30. The ‘‘facts’’ to be explained would include such examples as Poincaré’s
famous inspiration while stepping on a bus or, of more relevance to the present
discussion, Hamilton’s ‘‘moment of truth’’ on Dublin bridge.
       31. ‘‘We thus see (1) that genius is a talent for producing that for which
no deﬁnite rule can be given; it is not a mere aptitude for what can be learnt by
a rule. Hence originality must be its ﬁrst property. (2) But since it also can
produce original nonsense, its products must be models, i.e. exemplary; and they
consequently ought not to spring from imitation, but must serve as a standard
or rule of judgement for others. (3) It cannot describe or indicate scientiﬁcally
how it brings about its products, but it gives the rule just as nature does. Hence
the author of a product for which he is indebted to his genius does not know
himself how he has come by his Ideas; and he has not the power to devise the
like at pleasure or in accordance with a plan, and to communicate it to others
in precepts that will enable them to produce similar products’’ (Kant 1991,
p. 168).
       32. ‘‘Unusually subtle responsiveness and energetic innovativeness is often
referred to as ‘genius,’ ‘creativity,’ or ‘imagination,’ but its operations can, I think,
be analyzed’’ (Pickering 1995c, p. 479, fn. 1).
       33. This episode actually takes up very little of Constructing Quarks, but it can
be seen as a fulcrum capable of tipping over the entire ediﬁce. Pickering himself
notes that the ‘‘traditional reductionist and nonemergent’’ sciences such as mo-
lecular biology and quark theory cannot be reached by his irreductionist and
historicizing ‘‘mangle,’’ viewed hubristically as a ‘‘theory of everything,’’ and that
although the domain of these sciences is small-since quark theory, for example,
is not only conﬁned to the laboratories and accelerators of particle physics but
deals with only the rarest phenomena to be observed in such environments-they
cannot be ignored. His response, faced with this small but critical challenge to the



224    Notes to Pages 114–117
hegemony of the mangle, is to suggest the resurrection of the rival to hierarchical
particle theories-namely, the S-matrix bootstrap-but understood as suitably
‘‘historized’’ in the sense that the attempt to discover ‘‘eternally stable’’ solutions
to the relevant equations is abandoned (1995a, pp. 246–252). The extremity of
this response is indicative of the size of the ﬂy in the ointment!
      34. It is worth noting that Greenberg gave two lectures on parastatistics at a
NATO Advanced Study Institute summer school in 1962. The school had as its
principal theme the application of group-theoretical methods to elementary par-
ticle physics and was attended by such notable physicists as Glashow, Salam, and
Nambu.
      35. In private correspondence, Pickering has acknowledged that, on this
point, he relied upon Nambu, who described Greenberg’s work as ‘‘very formal.’’
Nevertheless, he maintains that the choice to pursue color was made in purely
contingent terms regarding the routine techniques that could be applied.
      36. Notably, the existence of the photon simply falls out of such a gauge
invariant theory of electromagnetism.
      37. ‘‘Gauge invariance . . . is used as a guide in constructing new ﬁeld the-
ories’’ (Post 1971, p. 227).
      38. Here we stand accused-but happily so-of ‘‘ontologizing’’ constraints,
in the sense of regarding them as structuring and explaining the ‘‘ﬂow of practice’’
from without (Pickering 1995a, p. 66, fn. 37).
      39. Giere incorporates such success into his ‘‘satisﬁcing’’ account of scientiﬁc
decision making, in which decision makers, instead of choosing the option with
the maximum expected utility, select an outcome they deem ‘‘satisfactory’’ (1988,
pp. 157–170).
      40. This is a factor that also arises within so-called everyday or natural
reasoning (see da Costa and French 1993b).
      41. For discussions of the nature of symmetry arguments and their role in
science, see van Fraassen 1989 and Castellani 1999; for more on the heuristic role
of symmetry principles, in particular, see Redhead 1975.
      42. ‘‘The superlaws of symmetry . . . are as liable to empirical revision as
other laws of physics having a less obviously intuitive character’’ (Redhead 1975,
p. 105). Perhaps these ‘‘superlaws’’ should also be regarded as ‘‘quasi-’’ or par-
tially true. (This suggestion is made but not explored in French 2000.)
      43. Cf. van Fraassen: ‘‘Symmetry arguments have that lovely air of the a
priori, ﬂattering what William James called the sentiment of rationality. And they
are a priori and powerful; but they carry us forward from an initial position of
empirical risk, to a ﬁnal point with still exactly the same risk. The degree of
empirical fallibility remains invariant’’ (1989, pp. 260–261).
      44. ‘‘There is a series of restrictions . . . which render the activity of the sci-
entist constructing new theories essentially different from that of a clueless rat
trying one trapdoor after another (a remark probably also applying to any actual
rat).’’ (Post 1971, p. 218).
      45. One can also accommodate the openness of practice within other forms
of the semantic approach. Thus Suppe notes that ‘‘theories undergoing active
development frequently are not put forward as literally or even counterfactually
true, but rather as ‘promising,’ ‘worth pursuing,’ ‘approximately correct,’ ‘being
on to something,’ ‘being in a certain respect importantly true, but in other respects
profoundly wrong as well,’ and so on. And in their developmental states, such
theories typically are importantly incomplete in their accounts of phenomena’’
(Suppe 1989, p. 347). This is taken to support Suppe’s ‘‘quasirealism,’’ articulated



                                                      Notes to Pages 118–121 225
in the context of his ‘‘relational systems’’ version of the semantic approach, ac-
cording to which theories purport to describe how the world would behave if it
were ‘‘nice and clean.’’
      46. There is more to be said here, of course. Thus van Fraassen regards
models as ‘‘incomplete’’ in two different ways: (1) in the sense that completion can
be achieved through empirical extension; (2) in the sense of possessing ‘‘meaning
gaps,’’ which are plugged by an ‘‘interpretation’’ of the model itself (1991, p. 9).
      47. Nersessian makes a similar point and replaces ‘‘justiﬁcation’’ and ‘‘dis-
covery’’ with the unitary context of ‘‘development’’ (Nersessian 1993, p. 6).
      48. As Suppe also notes, following Kuhn’s and Feyerabend’s claims regard-
ing incommensurability, subsequent discussions of meaning change in science
were tacitly concerned with individuating theories linguistically. It may be
counted another plus for the distinction between a theory and its linguistic for-
mulation highlighted by the semantic approach that such issues to do with
meaning can be seen to be separate from the problem of theory individuation.
      49. Sticking our collective necks out even further, perhaps all examples of
scientiﬁc ‘‘representation’’ broadly construed, might be treated in this way. Con-
sider, for example, diagrams of experimental apparatus: At a recent seminar on
the difﬁculties in reproducing Joule’s famous paddlewheel experiment, it was
pointed out that drawings culled from Joule’s papers could not be relied upon for
the purposes of accurate reconstruction. However, this is to presume that accurate
reconstruction was the ultimate purpose of such diagrams. Rather, we would
hazard, their function was to indicate the most pertinent relationships between the
various components of the apparatus, these relationships revealing-at least in
this case-the lines of force involved. Nersessian, again, has drawn attention to
the role of images and ‘‘imagistic reasoning’’ in theory development and claims
that, in the quantitative phase of development, the image ‘‘serves primarily to
make certain structural relationships visualizable’’ (1993, p. 24).
      50. Cf. Nersessian (1993, p. 13), who credits Sellars with the insight that
‘‘analogical reasoning creates a bridge from existing to new conceptual frame-
works through the mapping of relational structures from the old to the new.’’ She
goes on to claim that ‘‘most cognitive theories of analogy agree that the creative
heart of analogical reasoning is a modelling process in which relational structures
from existing modes of representation and problem solutions are abstracted from a
source domain and are ﬁtted to the constraints of the new problem domain’’
(1993, p. 20). Pertinent features of this process as revealed by psychological
studies include the preservation of relational systems and the isomorphic mapping
of relationships (1993).
      51. Cf. Kuhn again: ‘‘The role of acquired similarity relations also shows
clearly in the history of science. Scientists solve puzzles by modeling them on
previous puzzle-solutions, often with only minimal recourse to symbolic general-
izations’’ (1970, pp. 189–190).
      52. The relevant group here is U(1) and, corresponding to the symmetry
represented by this group, the property that is conserved is, of course, charge.
      53. The status of renormalization as a coherent mathematical technique is
problematic; for a comparatively sanguine appraisal, see Teller 1995, chapter 7.
Reuger has also argued that it counts as an example of a general heuristic strategy
of ensuring that reliable results are preserved through future changes in the
theory by conﬁning the unreliable parts (Rueger 1990).
      54. For further discussion of gauge invariance and its role as a heuristic
criterion, see Redhead 2002 and Earman 2002.



226   Notes to Pages 122–123
      55. ‘‘There is no theoretical way of drawing a sharp distinction between a
piece of pure mathematics and a piece of theoretical science. The set-theoretical
deﬁnitions of the theory of mechanics, the theory of thermodynamics, and the
theory of learning, to give three rather disparate examples, are on all fours with
the deﬁnitions of the purely mathematical theories of groups, rings, ﬁelds, etc.
From the philosophical standpoint, there is no sharp distinction between pure
and applied mathematics, in spite of much talk to the contrary’’ (Suppes 1967,
pp. 29–30). Thus there may be no distinction in principle between what Pick-
ering refers to as ‘‘conceptual’’ practice and what we have called scientiﬁc
practice.
      56. Thus ‘‘resistance’’ can be equated with the absence of the appropriate
isomorphism holding.
      57. Nersessian, again: ‘‘According to Maxwell, a physical analogy provides
both a set of mathematical relationships and an imagistic representation of the
structure of those relationships drawn from a ‘source’ domain to be applied in ana-
lyzing a ‘target’ domain about which there is only partial knowledge’’ (1993, p. 17).
      58. As Collier notes, the problem is not that of formally establishing iso-
morphisms between models but rather that of ruling out those that are unin-
teresting (1992, pp. 294–295). What we are about here, of course, and at least in
part, is delineating the sorts of considerations that are typically drawn upon to
rule out the uninteresting and unworkable isomorphisms in theory development.
      59. Incommensurability is now understood in terms of incompatible primi-
tive similarity sets (Kuhn 1970, pp. 198–207), and this marks the beginning of
Kuhn’s elaboration of this notion in terms of different systems of natural kinds.
      60. This interpretation does not necessarily correspond to Kuhn’s, although
it is not at all clear exactly what the latter is; for a detailed analysis of Kuhn’s
evolving views on this issue see Hoyningen-Huene 1993, pp. 90ff.


   Chapter 7
     1. Of course, this form of inference is part of statistics, which we take to form
part of, or an aspect of, scientiﬁc practice and hence, as a method, part of inductive
logic.
     2. This focus on subjective probability is not in any sense intended to di-
minish the role of objective probability in science; on the contrary, we believe it to
be indispensable. The two kinds of probability are connected by what we shall call
the Principle of the Coherent Use of Probabilities: If we accept that the objective
probability of a certain state of affairs s is p, then our subjective probability in the
quasi truth of the proposition that s occurs is also p.
     3. One could make a similar remark with respect to logical probability. Of
course, we accept the standard statistical methods in certain situations. As far as
we are concerned, classical statistics itself constitutes an inductive method and
should be regarded as constrained by our views of inductive logic.
     4. Strictly speaking, the set of propositions closed by the connectives con-
stitute a Boolean prealgebra; it is when we pass to the quotient, in the standard
manner, that we get a Boolean algebra.
     5. Cf. the arguments of Salmon 1966 and Shimony 1970, which may be
adapted to our account.
     6. Salmon (1966) and Shimony (1970) adopt a similar position with regard
to scientiﬁc inference; cf. also Teller (1975).



                                                     Notes to Pages 123–136 227
     7. Again, certain aspects of Salmon’s and Shimony’s accounts can be
adopted here, as can elements of the work of Wrinch and Jeffreys (1921; Jeffreys
1961) and Keynes (1921). However, we want to make it absolutely clear that
these results are not being appealed to in order to underpin some sort of justiﬁ-
cation of induction; rather they simply help us choose certain hypotheses instead
of others, in particular situations. We take it that induction is ‘‘justiﬁed’’ only as a
method that directs our degrees of belief, as it were: We act according to our
beliefs. Whether we really arrive at the truth or quasi truth is another question,
which we shall touch on toward the end of this chapter.
     8. It might be insisted that one of the set of hypotheses be signiﬁcantly more
quasi-true than the alternatives. If we were considering truth simpliciter, instead
of quasi truth, this would amount to a realist demand. It is an interesting question
whether it remains plausible when it is quasi truth that we are concerned with,
but one that takes us too far beyond the present discussion.
     9. The proof of this inequality is roughly as follows (further details can be
found in Redhead 1985): First of all, p(h _ e) ¼ p(h) + p(e). If we conditionalize
on e, p(h) must increase, according to p(h/e) > p(h). However, p(e) then goes to
zero, and this decrease more than compensates for the increase in p(h).
     10. As Comte remarked, in physics there are no correct deductions.
     11. There is a nice similarity here with Cherniak’s point that consistency
checks are typically not feasible for reasons that are likewise ultimately prag-
matic but in a profound sense that edges close to the ‘‘in principle’’ (Cherniak
1984).
     12. Edidin has argued that such bootstraps should be cut off, since they
generate serious problems for the strategy and actually add nothing to it (1983).
     13. For a detailed consideration (in Portuguese) of Newton’s argument for
the Law of Universal Gravitation within the framework of the bootstrapping ap-
proach, see French 1989b.
     14. For further discussion of the relationship between the bootstrap and
Bayesian approaches, see Horwich 1983, Rosenkrantz 1983, and Garber 1983.
     15. This approach obviously meshes nicely with a ‘‘cumulative’’ account of
scientiﬁc progress. We recall that the General Correspondence Principle-which
broadly states that we never lose the best of what we had-is mirrored within our
system by the Principle of the Permanent Nature of Pragmatic Truth: Once a
theory has been shown to be pragmatically true within a certain domain, it
remains pragmatically true, within that domain.
     16. See also the work of Hintikka and Niiniluoto 1980 and Kuipers 1978
and 1980; our result is essentially a transformation of Horwich’s ‘‘pseudoproof’’
into a ‘‘full’’ or ‘‘good’’ one; see Horwich 1982, especially chapter 3.


   Chapter 8
     1. The appeal to ‘‘maturity’’ is meant to block certain counterexamples
from the history of science. The problem, of course, is to come up with a
non-question-begging deﬁnition of ‘‘mature.’’ ‘‘Intuitively,’’ there would seem to
be many examples of short-lived or otherwise problematic theories that one would
not want to describe as approximately true. However, the Aristotelian ‘‘theory’’ of
the crystalline spheres was not so short-lived, appeared to be comparatively un-
problematic, and might well be regarded as ‘‘mature’’ on this intuitive under-
standing, yet, again, many realists would hesitate in describing it as even



228    Notes to Pages 137–160
approximately true. Hence, maturity has been linked to novel predictive success,
in the sense that the theory predicts certain kinds of phenomena where these
phenomena have not been ‘‘written into’’ the theory during its construction (see
Worrall 1996, pp. 153–154). This understanding of maturity is problematic, since
one could argue that Bohr’s theory/model enjoyed such success, yet, intuitively at
least, cannot be regarded as ‘‘mature.’’ Here we simply wish to point out two
connections: ﬁrst, that it is related to a general motivation for realism known as
the ‘‘no miracles argument’’ and second, that although it rules out certain
counterexamples to the realist’s theses, others remain. We shall explore aspects of
these connections later.
      2. Giere defends a form of ‘‘constructive realism’’ that contains features rem-
iniscent of Hacking’s ‘‘entity realism’’ (which we shall mention later), together
with certain modal elements; we are grateful to Grant Fisher for pointing out some
of the tensions within Giere’s account.
      3. Psillos offers a framework for a theory of ‘‘truthlikeness,’’ according to
which a theory is approximately true of a world, if it is strictly true of a world that
approximates the actual world under certain conditions (1999, p. 277). Of course,
this reduces approximate truth to a relation of approximation holding between
worlds, and it is not clear how this might be spelled out.
      4. This might be seen as already a big concession to realism, since if the
successor theory entails that its predecessor was strictly incorrect, then for an
antirealist there can be no reference to such a domain described in ‘‘pre-
theoretical’’ terms (see van Fraassen 1977, p. 598). Bueno’s form of ‘‘structural
empiricism’’-discussed later-offers a possible way for the antirealist to accom-
modate this point.
      5. As in the case of the older instrumentalism, a distinction must be made
between the observable and unobservable, a distinction that is notoriously difﬁcult
to draw as the sequence electron, atom, molecule, macromolecule, amoeba dem-
onstrates (Horwich 1982, p. 136).
      6. Horwich also includes the planet Pluto, but insofar as this counts as ob-
servable, according to some antirealists-such as the constructive empiricist-we
shall not regard it as especially problematic.
      7. This is a point that has been emphasized by Ladyman in a seminar to the
HPS Research Workshop at the University of Leeds.
      8. It is interesting that the conservation law also featured in the rival dy-
namical conception of heat and was thus seen as independent of the hypotheses
concerning the nature of heat itself (Psillos 1999, p. 118). In other words, what
was detached was a certain structural aspect common to both theories and thus
independent of the metaphysical assumptions regarding the entity concerned.
      9. One can understand the case study presented by Psillos as a study of
pursuit, and as Psillos emphasizes, the attitude of the scientists themselves was one
of ‘‘cautious and differentiated belief’’ (1999, p. 119).
      10. Of course, both may decrease or vanish altogether, in which case the
degree of belief in the existence of the ether itself might be said to vanish as well.
      11. For a detailed analysis of this case that leads to this conclusion, see
Norton and Bain (forthcoming).
      12. In this sense we are following Peirce, who argued that the means for
justifying our beliefs are the same as those for establishing the truth of our the-
ories. We shall return to the pragmatist approach later.
      13. When we are talking about degrees of belief in this context, it is im-
portant to bear in mind that normally we are not talking about strictly subjective



                                                     Notes to Pages 161–172 229
probabilities but considering only systems of degrees that are constituted by sets of
qualitative degrees of belief, ordered by a reﬂexive, symmetrical, and transitive
relation, in general with least and greatest degrees. Sometimes, the ordering is not
even linear. This point is important for our entire project, since the scientist (and
the philosopher, etc.) usually has only qualitative degrees of belief in her hy-
potheses, theories, and the like. In very particular situations only do we really
need subjective probabilities.
      14. Interestingly or bizarrely-depending on your point of view-Cartwright
has recently offered a form of transcendental argument for her ‘‘patchwork’’
realism (Cartwright 1996 and 1999).
      15. Psillos tries to avoid such accusations by noting that some critics of
realism will accept abductive inferences of the form embodied in IBE (1999, p. 89),
but the point is, if they’re honest antirealists, they shouldn’t!
      16. Psillos is concerned with a different problem. He notes that ‘‘even if
instrumentalism were shown to be the best explanation of the instrumental suc-
cess of science, it could not be more empirically adequate’’ (1999, p. 91). Hence, by
the instrumentalist’s own lights, instrumentalism could be no more belief worthy
than realism. There is, then, at the metalevel itself a form of underdetermination
(see later for discussion of this at the good old object level). Psillos sees this as a
problem for the instrumentalist, since she either has to admit that instrumentalism
is no better than realism in these terms or admit other explanatory virtues into the
framework, in which case she concedes the point to realism. But, of course, the
knife cuts both ways: The realist also needs to break the underdetermination, and if
she does so by insisting on these other virtues, then she will be accused of question
begging. And, of course, there is no possibility of her resorting to the standard
realist ploy (see later) of adopting a ‘‘wait and see’’ attitude-the extension of the
theories to cover new phenomena may reveal one to be more adequate than the
other-since there can be no ‘‘new’’ phenomena at this level! Perhaps one can
avoid the underdetermination in the ﬁrst place with some alternative between
realism and instrumentalism. Fine’s ‘‘Natural Ontological Attitude’’ represents just
such an attempt but is ﬂawed in various respects.
      17. Worrall gives the example of Newton’s explanation of planetary orbits in
terms of the Law of Universal Gravity, which also explained Halley’s comet, the
oblateness of the Earth, and other matters (1996).
      18. Putnam himself seems to have retreated to a weaker position in sug-
gesting that realism is akin to an empirical hypothesis in the sense that it could be
false and that it can be supported by ‘‘facts,’’ but that doesn’t mean that realism is
scientiﬁc (1978). Even this may be too strong: In what sense could realism be
regarded as ‘‘false’’? In what sense could the success of science be regarded as a
‘‘fact’’? Or, at least, in what sense can it be regarded as a ‘‘fact’’ on a par with the
‘‘facts’’ of science that can falsify theories?
      19. Dewey was attacked for proposing a form of idealism, but as James points
out, ‘‘His account of knowledge is not only absurd, but meaningless, unless in-
dependent existences be there of which our ideas take account, and for the
transformation of which they work’’ (James 1932, p. xvii).
      20. As we have just seen, for Dewey they are resolved by ‘‘ﬁxing’’ the sit-
uation (for a comparison, see Smith 1978, pp. 97–98).
      21. Note that there can be no procedure for resolving skeptical doubts since
any such procedure would itself be subject to doubt.
      22. These are, of course, different from ‘‘hypothetical doubts’’ arising in
scientiﬁc practice, which Peirce agreed were genuine.



230    Notes to Pages 172–180
      23. It might be viewed as akin to the realist’s (somewhat violent) response to
the social constructivist, which consists of dropping a piece of lab equipment on
the latter’s foot!
      24. There is a naturalist element in Peirce’s thinking in that he sometimes
regarded philosophical inquiry as an extension of the scientiﬁc method, so that
science and philosophy could be regarded as continuous (see Smith 1978,
p. 32).
      25. Thus the constructive empiricist would reject Peirce’s antinominalism.
      26. This is, of course, strongly reminiscent of certain moves made by Schlick,
Feigl, and Carnap, for example, in responding to earlier concerns in the debate
between realists and instrumentalists (see the discussion in Psillos 1999, chapter
3). Of course, it is not at all clear that this debate maps so smoothly onto the
current realist-antirealist debate.
      27. There is still a problem, however. Should our epistemic values be equated
with our cognitive values, as seems implicit in this discussion? If they are, then one
could argue that all such values ultimately reduce to those cognitive values that
pertain to observation. But in that case it is not clear what distinguishes the
pragmatic realist from the constructive empiricist, who likewise argues that what
is observable is what is observable for us, as an epistemic community delineated by
our particular cognitive faculties (van Fraassen 1980). On the other hand, if they
are not equated, then the notion of an ‘‘epistemic value’’ may be too weak to block
a form of relativism. Even if we agree upon a core of transcultural values, what
about contentious ones such as simplicity, for example? If different scientiﬁc
communities adopt different measures of simplicity, then they may end up ranking
different theories as ‘‘the best’’ and hence as claiming the world is different for
them. Pragmatic realism could use some further development on these points.
      28. For an illuminating discussion of the history of structuralism, especially
as it appears in the views of physicists, as well as a critique of modern forms of
structural realism, see van Fraassen (forthcoming).
      29. Thus this form of structural realism is tied to the sort of ‘‘cumulativist’’
approach to science we have defended here; see again Post 1971.
      30. And indeed, mathematical systems such as topology, ordered systems,
game theory, and ﬁnite geometry can cope with qualitative ideas. The point is that
structural realism need not be tied to highly mathematized theories only.
      31. The role of Ramsey sentences in expressing the structural aspects of
theories is well known and was famously adopted by Carnap, for example (Psillos
1999, pp. 48–58). It should come as no surprise, therefore, to ﬁnd elements of
structuralism in Carnap’s work, as when he refers to the particular structure of the
domain of the theoretical language and writes that ‘‘the structure can be uniquely
speciﬁed but the elements of the structure cannot. Not because we are ignorant of
their nature; rather because there is no question of their nature’’ (Carnap 1956,
p. 46). Carnap, of course, advocated a form of ‘‘neutralism’’ that regarded the
conﬂict between realism and instrumentalism as essentially linguistic (Psillos 1999,
pp. 58–63). The essential idea lies in the claim that from the perspective of the
representation of theories in terms of Ramsey sentences, to assert the existence of
electrons is just to assert the truth of quantum mechanics (see our previous dis-
cussion), where the former is understood as the assertion of the existence of certain
kinds of events that are called ‘‘electrons’’ in the theoretical language. This might be
viewed as a form of ‘‘structural empiricism’’ (see, for example, Bueno 1999a) rather
than structural realism, and we shall consider the former in a little more detail later
(Psillos argues that it, too, falls prey to the Newman problem [1999, pp. 63–67]).



                                                     Notes to Pages 181–187 231
      32. At a symposium on structural realism at the British Society for the
Philosophy of Science annual conference, Worrall sought to defend his Ramsey
sentence approach to structural realism against the Newman problem by appeal to
the distinction between observational and theoretical terms, articulated syntacti-
cally (Worrall 2000).
      33. Post refers to this case as an example of what he calls ‘‘inconsistent
correspondence,’’ since classical mechanics agrees only approximately with the
relativistic form, in the sense that the latter asymptotically converges to the former
in the limit and the former asserts a proposition that only agrees with the latter in
that limit (1971, p. 243). For further discussion, see Pagonis 1996.
      34. Bueno has suggested that allowing for approximate correspondence may
fatally weaken structural realism, since it apparently grants that there may be
structural losses, in which case a form of pessimistic meta-induction may be re-
instated (private discussion). This is an important point. One way of dealing with it
would be to insist that not all structures get carried over, as it were, but only those
that are genuinely explanatory. We could then avail ourselves of Post’s historically
based claim that there simply are no ‘‘Kuhn-losses,’’ in the sense of successor
theories losing all or part of the explanatory structures of their predecessors
(1971, p. 229).
      35. As Domski has emphasized, Poincaré may not be the most suitable
forefather to claim for this form of structural realism, given his Kantian inclina-
tions and rejection of truth as the aim of science (Domski preprint). She offers the
early Schlick as a more suitable candidate. If theoretical content is cashed out in
terms of the nature of ‘‘real objects,’’ understood in a Kantian sense, then the
realist side of SR may be radically transformed, to say the least.
      36. Boltzmann, for example, wrote such an understanding of objects into
Axiom I of his Mechanics.
      37. Some realists have insisted that they need not be committed to such an
understanding, but then it is not clear what the content of their realism is. They
are presumably committed to the existence of electrons, say, and to the claim that
these electrons possess certain properties such as charge and spin, but they cannot
say what these electrons are, fundamentally. This amounts to little more than the
insistence that there is something ‘‘out there,’’ but we know not what,
metaphysically speaking. Ladyman refers to this as ‘‘ersatz realism’’ (Ladyman
1998).
      38. If the realist refuses to be drawn on the metaphysics at least at the level of
individuality versus nonindividuality, then how are we supposed to make sense of
the impact of quantum mechanics?
      39. Elements of such a view can be found earlier in the history of structur-
alism, in the work of Cassirer and Eddington, for example (for further details, see
French and Ladyman forthcoming; French forthcoming a).
      40. Yet again one can detect something akin to this idea in Apostel’s work,
where he suggests that we might deﬁne the notions of element and relation in
terms of that of ‘‘system,’’ taken as primitive (1961, pp. 20–21). Thus, ‘‘The
deﬁnition of what is to be called element or relation should . . . be a function of the
intersection of systems’’ (p. 21).
      41. In a further program of research, Bueno has extended the ‘‘ethos’’ of
constructive empiricism into the philosophy of mathematics by arguing that, in its
application to science, mathematics does not need to be true, but only quasi-true
(1999b). Shifting-once again-to the extrinsic perspective, the applicability of
mathematics can be analyzed in terms of partial homomorphisms holding between



232    Notes to Pages 187–194
mathematical and empirical (partial) structures (for further details, see French
1999 and 2000; Bueno and French 1999).


   Chapter 9
      1. We are grateful to Alirio Rosales for recent discussions on this topic.
      2. Similarly, uniﬁcation in science can also be considered from the model-
theoretic perspective, and again the partial structures approach might be put to
good use here (a preliminary attempt can be found in da Costa 1989).
      3. Just as in the case of inconsistency in science, nonclassical logic has been
turned to here as well. Barnes and Bloor, for example, have suggested, ‘‘It is ironic
that logicians, who expose with admirable ruthlessness how problematic, variable
and difﬁcult to ground patterns of inference are, and who freely confess how very
little is agreed upon by the totality of practitioners in their ﬁeld, are turned to
again and again to provide constraints upon the possibilities of rational thought.
Just as there is always a certain demand for iron laws of economics, so there seems
always to be a demand for iron laws of logic’’ (1982, p. 45, fn. 40). For a con-
sideration of the possibility of applying paraconsistent logic to the Zande case, see
da Costa, Bueno, and French 1998b.




                                                    Notes to Pages 195–198 233
This page intentionally left blank
          REFERENCES

Achinstein, P. (1968), Concepts of Science: A Philosophical Analysis, Johns Hopkins
     Press.
Achinstein, P. (1991), ‘‘Maxwell’s Analogies and Kinetic Theory,’’ in P. Achin-
     stein, Particles and Waves: Historical Essays in the Philosophy of Science, Oxford
     University Press: 207–232.
Addison, J. W. (1965), ‘‘Some Notes on the Theory of Models,’’ in J. W. Addison, L.
     Henkin, and A. Tarski (eds.), The Theory of Models, North-Holland: 438–441.
Alcoff, L. (1986), ‘‘Charles Peirce’s Alternative to the Skeptical Dilemma,’’ Aus-
     legung 13: 6–19.
Almeder, R. (1987), ‘‘Blind Realism,’’ Erkenntnis 26: 57–101.
Alves, E. H. (1984), ‘‘Paraconsistent Logic and Model Theory,’’ Studia Logica 43:
     17–32.
Anderson, R., and Joshi, G. C. (1993), ‘‘Quaternions and the Heuristic Role of
     Mathematical Structures in Physics,’’ Physics Essays 6: 308–319.
Apostel, L. (1961), ‘‘Towards the Formal Study of Models in the Non-Formal
     Sciences,’’ in H. Freudenthal (ed.), The Concept and the Role of the Model in
     Mathematics and Natural and Social Sciences, D. Reidel: 1–37.
Arruda, A. I. (1980), ‘‘A Survey of Paraconsistent Logic,’’ in A. I. Arruda,
     R. Chuaqui, and N. C. A. da Costa (eds.), Mathematical Logic in Latin America,
     North-Holland: 1–42.
Arruda, A. I. (1989), ‘‘Aspects of the Historical Development of Paraconsistent
     Logic,’’ in G. Priest, R. Routley, and J. Norman (eds.), Paraconsistent Logic: Essays
     on the Inconsistent, Philosophia, Munich: 99–130.
Baird, D. (1995), ‘‘Meaning in a Material Medium,’’ in D. Hull, M. Forbes, and
     R. M. Burian (eds.), PSA 1994, Vol. 2, Philosophy of Science Association:
     441–451.
Barnes, B. (1977), Interests and the Growth of Knowledge, Routledge and Kegan
     Paul.
Barnes, B., and Bloor, D. (1982), ‘‘Relativism, Rationalism and the Sociology of
     Knowledge,’’ in M. Hollis and S. Lukes (eds.), Rationality and Relativism, MIT
     Press: 21–47.
Barnes, S. B. (1968), ‘‘Paradigms, Scientiﬁc and Social,’’ Man 4: 94–102.



                                          235
Bartelborth, T. (1989), ‘‘Is Bohr’s Model of the Atom Inconsistent?’’ in
     P. Weingartner and G. Schurz (eds.), Philosophy of the Natural Sciences, Pro-
     ceedings of the 13th International Wittgenstein Symposium, HPT: 220–223.
Barwise, J., and Perry, J. (1983), Situations and Attitudes, MIT Press.
Beth, E. W. (1949), ‘‘Towards an Up-to-Date Philosophy of the Natural Sciences,’’
     Methodos 1: 178–185.
Black, M. (1962), Models and Metaphors, Cornell University Press.
Black, M. (1970), Margins of Precision, Cornell University Press.
Bloor, D. (1983), Wittgenstein: A Social Theory of Knowledge, Columbia University Press.
Bloor, D. (1992), ‘‘Left and Right Wittgensteinians,’’ in A. Pickering (ed.), Science
     as Practice and Culture, University of Chicago Press: 266–282.
Bogdan, R. J. (1986), ‘‘The Importance of Belief,’’ in R. J. Bogdan (ed.), Belief:
     Form, Content and Function, Oxford University Press: 1–16.
Bogen, J., and Woodward, J. (1988), ‘‘Saving the Phenomena,’’ Philosophical Re-
     view 12: 303–352.
Bohr, N. (1981), Niels Bohr Collected Works, Vol. 2, ed. U. Hoyer, North-Holland.
Bohr, N., and Wheeler, J. A. (1939), ‘‘The Mechanism of Nuclear Fission,’’ Phys-
     ical Review 56: 426–450.
Bourbaki, N. (1968), The Theory of Sets, Addison-Wesley.
Boyd, R. (1973), ‘‘Realism, Underdetermination and a Causal Theory of Evi-
     dence,’’ Nous 7: 1–12.
Boyd, R. (1984), ‘‘The Current Status of Scientiﬁc Realism,’’ in J. Leplin (ed.),
     Scientiﬁc Realism, University of California Press: 41–82.
Bradley, F. (1962), Appearance and Reality, Oxford University Press.
Braithwaite, R. (1953), Scientiﬁc Explanation, Cambridge University Press.
Braithwaite, R. B. (1962), ‘‘Models in the Empirical Science,’’ in E. Nagel,
     P. Suppes, and A. Tarski (eds.), Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science,
     Stanford University Press: 224–231.
Brown, B. (1990), ‘‘How to Be Realistic About Inconsistency in Science,’’ Studies in
     History and Philosophy of Science 21, 281–294.
Brown, B. (1993), ‘‘Old Quantum Theory: A Paraconsistent Approach,’’ PSA
     1992, Vol. 2, Philosophy of Science Association: 397–411.
Budd, M. (1993), ‘‘How Pictures Look,’’ in D. Knowles and J. Skorupski (eds.),
     Virtue and Taste, Blackwell: 154–175.
Bueno, O. (1997), ‘‘Empirical Adequacy: A Partial Structures Approach,’’ Studies
     in History and Philosophy of Science 28: 585–610.
Bueno, O. (1999a), ‘‘What Is Structural Empiricism? Scientiﬁc Change in an
     Empiricist Setting,’’ Erkenntnis 50: 59–85.
Bueno, O. (1999b), Philosophy of Mathematics: A Structural Empiricist View, Ph.D.
     Thesis, University of Leeds.
Bueno, O. (2000), ‘‘Empiricism, Mathematical Change and Scientiﬁc Change,’’
     Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 31: 269–296.
Bueno, O., and de Souza, E. (1996), ‘‘The Concept of Quasi-Truth,’’ Logique et
     Analyse 153–154: 183–199.
Bueno, O., and French, S. (1999), ‘‘Infestation or Pest Control: The Introduction of
     Group Theory into Quantum Mechanics,’’ Manuscrito 22: 37–86.
Bueno, O. and French, S. (forthcoming), ‘‘Underdetermination and the Openness
     of the Field of Evidence.’’
Bueno, O., French, S., and Ladyman, J. (2002), ‘‘On Representing the Relationship
     Between the Mathematical and the Physical,’’ Philosophy of Science 69:
     497–518.


236    References
Bunge, M. (1973), Method, Model and Matter, D. Reidel.
Callebaut, W. (1993), Taking the Naturalistic Turn, University of Chicago Press.
Callon, M., and Latour, B. (1992), ‘‘Don’t Throw the Baby Out with the Bath
     School!’’ in A. Pickering (ed.), Science as Practice and Culture, University of
     Chicago Press: 343–368.
Campbell, K. (1994), ‘‘Selective Realism in the Philosophy of Physics,’’ The Monist
     77: 27–46.
Cao, T. Y. (1997), Conceptual Developments of 20th Century Field Theories, Cam-
     bridge University Press.
Carnap, R. (1939), Foundations of Logic and Mathematics, University of Chicago
     Press.
Carnap, R. (1942), Introduction to Semantics, Harvard University Press.
Carnap, R. (1949), The Logical Syntax of Language, Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Carnap, R. (1956), ‘‘The Methodological Character of Theoretical Concepts,’’ in
     H. Feigl and M. Scriven (eds.), Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science
     Vol. I, University of Minnesota Press: 38–76.
Carnap, R. (1958), Introduction to Symbolic Logic and Its Applications, Dover.
Carnap, R. (1963), The Logical Foundations of Probability, University of Chicago
     Press.
Carnap, R. (1990), ‘‘Testability and Meaning,’’ in R. R. Ammerman (ed.), Classics
     of Analytic Philosophy, Hackett: 136–195; Philosophy of Science 3 and 4 (1936
     and 1937).
Cartwright, N. (1983), How the Laws of Physics Lie, Oxford University Press.
Cartwright, N. (1995), ‘‘The Metaphysics of the Disuniﬁed World,’’ in D. Hull,
     M. Forbes, and R. M. Burian (eds.), PSA 1994, Vol. 2, Philosophy of Science
     Association: 357–364.
Cartwright, N. (1996), ‘‘Fundamentalism vs. the Patchwork of Laws,’’ in D. Pa-
     pineau (ed.), The Philosophy of Science, Oxford University Press: 314–326.
Cartwright, N. (1999), The Dappled World: A Study of the Boundaries of Science,
     Cambridge University Press.
Cartwright, N., Shomar, T., and Suárez, M. (1995), ‘‘The Tool Box of Science:
     Tools for Building of Models with a Superconductivity Example,’’ in W. E.
     Herfel et al. (eds.), Theories and Models in Scientiﬁc Processes, Editions Rodopi:
     137–149.
Cassini, A. (1990), ‘‘Aspectos Semanticos y Ontologicos de la Justiﬁcacion Aris-
     totelica del Principio de no Contradiccion,’’ Elenchos 11: 5–28.
Castellani, E. (1998), ‘‘Galilean Particles: An Example of Constitution of Objects,’’
     in E. Castellani (ed.), Interpreting Bodies: Classical and Quantum Objects in
     Modern Physics, Princeton University Press: 181–194.
Castellani, E. (1999), Simmetria e Natura: Dalle armonie delle ﬁgure alle invarianze
     delle leggi, Roma-Bari, Laterza.
Chang, C. C. (1974), ‘‘Model Theory 1945–1971,’’ in L. Henkin et al. (eds.), Pro-
     ceedings of the Tarski Symposium, American Mathematical Society: 173–186.
Cherniak, C. (1984), ‘‘Computational Complexity and the Universal Acceptance of
     Logic,’’ Journal of Philosophy 81: 739–758.
Chisholm, R. (1992), ‘‘William James’s Theory of Truth,’’ The Monist 75: 569–
     579.
Cifuentes, J. C. (1992), O Método dos Isomorﬁsmos Parciais, Coleção CLE (Centro de
     Logica).
Cohen, C. J. (1981), ‘‘Can Human Irrationality Be Experimentally Demonstrated?’’
     Behavioral and Brain Sciences 4: 317–331.


                                                                    References 237
Cohen, L. J. (1989), ‘‘Belief and Acceptance,’’ Mind 98: 367–389.
Collier, J. D. (1992), ‘‘Critical Notice: Paul Thompson, The Structure of Biological
     Theories,’’ Canadian Journal of Philosophy 22: 287–298.
Collins, H. M., and Yearley, S. (1992), ‘‘Epistemological Chicken,’’ in A. Pickering
     (ed.), Science as Practice and Culture, University of Chicago Press: 301–326.
Culp, S. (1995), ‘‘Objectivity in Experimental Inquiry: Breaking Data-Technique
     Circles,’’ Philosophy of Science 62: 430–450.
Czarnocka, M. (1995), ‘‘Models and Symbolic Nature of Knowledge,’’ in W. E.
     Herfel et al. (eds.), Theories and Models in Scientiﬁc Processes, Editions Rodopi:
     27–36.
Da Costa, N. C. A. (1958), ‘‘Nota Sobre o Conceito de Contradição,’’ Anuário da
     Sociedade Paranaense de Matemática 1 (NS): 6–8.
Da Costa, N. C. A. (1974a), ‘‘On the Theory of Inconsistent Formal Systems,’’
     Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 11: 497–510.
Da Costa, N. C. A. (1974b), Sistemas Formais Inconsistentes, NEPEC.
Da Costa, N. C. A. (1981), Logica Indutiva e Probabilidade, Mathematics and Sta-
     tistics Institute of the University of Sao Paulo.
Da Costa, N. C. A. (1982), ‘‘The Philosophical Import of Paraconsistent Logic,’’
     Journal of Non-Classical Logic 1: 1–12.
Da Costa, N. C. A. (1986a), ‘‘On Paraconsistent Set Theory,’’ Logique et Analyse
     115: 361–371.
Da Costa, N. C. A. (1986b), ‘‘Pragmatic Probability,’’ Erkenntnis 25: 141–162.
Da Costa, N. C. A. (1987a), ‘‘O Conceito de Estrutura em Ciência,’’ Boletim da
     Sociedade Paranaense de Matemática 8: 1–22.
Da Costa, N. C. A. (1987b), ‘‘Outlines of a System of Inductive Logic,’’ Teoria 7:
     3–13.
Da Costa, N. C. A. (1989), ‘‘Logic and Pragmatic Truth,’’ in J. E. Fenstad et al.
     (eds.), Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science VIII, Elsevier: 247–261.
Da Costa, N. C. A., Béziau, J. Y., and Bueno, O. A. B. (1997), Teorias Paraconsistente
     de Conjuntos, Centro de Lógica.
Da Costa, N. C. A., and Bueno, O. A. B. (1998), Review of Balzer, W., and Mou-
     lines, C. V., Structuralist Theory of Science, History and Philosophy of Logic 19:
     270–272.
Da Costa, N. C. A., Bueno, O. A. B., and French, S. (1998a), ‘‘The Logic of
     Pragmatic Truth,’’ Journal of Philosophical Logic 27: 603–620.
Da Costa, N. C. A., Bueno, O. A. B., and French, S. (1998b), ‘‘Is There a Zande
     Logic?’’ History and Philosophy of Logic 19: 41–54.
Da Costa, N. C. A., and Chuaqui, R. (1988), ‘‘On Suppes’ Set-Theoretical Pred-
     icates,’’ Erkenntnis 29: 95–112.
Da Costa, N. C. A., and Doria, F. (1992), ‘‘Suppes Predicates for Classical Physics,’’
     in J. Echeverria, A. Ibarra, and T. Mormann (eds.), The Space of Mathematics,
     Walter de Gruyter: 168–191.
Da Costa, N. C. A., and Doria, F. (1995), ‘‘On Jaskowski’s Discussive Logics,’’
     Studia Logica 54: 33–60.
Da Costa, N. C. A., and Doria, F. (1996), ‘‘Structures, Suppes Predicates and
     Boolean-Valued Models in Physics,’’ in P. I. Bystrov and V. N. Sadovsky (eds.),
     Philosophical Logic and Logical Philosophy, Kluwer: 91–118.
Da Costa, N. C. A., Doria, F., and de Barros, J. A. (1990), ‘‘A Suppes Predicate for
     General Relativity and Set-Theoretically Generic Spacetimes,’’ International
     Journal of Theoretical Physics 29: 935–961.




238    References
Da Costa, N. C. A., and Dubikajtis, L. (1977), ‘‘On Jaskowski’s Discussive Logic,’’ in
     A. I. Arruda, N. C. A. da Costa, and R. Chuaqui (eds.), Non-Classical Logics,
     Model Theory and Computability, North-Holland: 37–56.
Da Costa, N. C. A., and French, S. (1988), ‘‘Pragmatic Probability, Logical Om-
     niscience and the Popper-Miller Argument,’’ Fundamenta Scientae 9: 43–53.
Da Costa, N. C. A., and French, S. (1989a), ‘‘Pragmatic Truth and the Logic of
     Induction,’’ The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 40: 333–356.
Da Costa, N. C. A., and French, S. (1989b), ‘‘On the Logic of Belief,’’ Philosophy and
     Phenomenological Research 49: 431–446.
Da Costa, N. C. A., and French, S. (1989c), ‘‘Critical Study of ‘In Contradiction,’’’
     Philosophical Quarterly 39: 498–501.
Da Costa, N. C. A., and French, S. (1990a), ‘‘The Model-Theoretic Approach in the
     Philosophy of Science,’’ Philosophy of Science 57: 248–265.
Da Costa, N. C. A., and French, S. (1990b), ‘‘Belief, Contradiction and the Logic of
     Self-Deception,’’ American Philosophical Quarterly 27: 179–197.
Da Costa, N. C. A., and French, S. (1991a), ‘‘Consistency, Omniscience and
     Truth,’’ Philosophical Science 8: 51–69 (Russian translation).
Da Costa, N. C. A., and French, S. (1991b), ‘‘On Russell’s Principle of Induction,’’
     Synthese 86: 285–295.
Da Costa, N. C. A., and French, S. (1993a), ‘‘Towards an Acceptable Theory of
     Acceptance,’’ in S. French and H. Kamminga, Correspondence, Invariance and
     Heuristics, D. Reidel: 137–158.
Da Costa, N. C. A., and French, S. (1993b), ‘‘A Model Theoretic Approach to
     ‘Natural Reasoning,’’’ International Studies in the Philosophy of Science 7:
     177–190.
Da Costa, N. C. A., and French, S. (1995), ‘‘Partial Structures and the Logic of the
     Azande,’’ American Philosophical Quarterly 32: 325–339.
Da Costa, N. C. A., and French, S. (2000), ‘‘Theories, Models and Structures:
     Thirty Years On,’’ Philosophy of Science 67 (Proceedings): S116–S127.
Da Costa, N. C. A., and French, S. (forthcoming), ‘‘Inconsistency in Science,’’ in
     Proceedings of the World Congress of Paraconsistency.
Da Costa, N. C. A., and Krause, D. (1994), ‘‘Schrödinger Logics,’’ Studia Logica 53:
     533–550.
Da Costa, N. C. A., and Marconi, D. (1987), An Overview of Paraconsistent Logic in
     the 80s, Monograﬁas da Sociedade Paranaense de Matemática (reprinted in
     Logica Nova, Akademie-Verlag, 1988).
Dalla Chiara, M. L., and Toraldo di Francia, G. (1993), ‘‘Individuals, Kinds and
     Names in Physics,’’ in G. Corsi et al. (eds.), Bridging the Gap: Philosophy,
     Mathematics, Physics, Kluwer Academic Press: 261–283.
De Finetti, B. (1970), Teoria delle Probabilita, Einaudi.
Demopoulos, W., and Friedman, M. (1985), ‘‘Critical Notice: Bertrand Russell’s
     The Analysis of Matter: Its Historical Context and Contemporary Interest,’’
     Philosophy of Science 52: 621–639.
Domski, M. (preprint), ‘‘The Epistemological Foundations of Structural Realism:
     Poincaré and the Structure of Relations,’’ paper given to the Research Work-
     shop of the Division of History and Philosophy of Science, University of Leeds.
Donovan, A., Laudan, L., and Laudan, R. (eds.) (1988), Scrutinizing Science: Em-
     pirical Studies of Scientiﬁc Change, D. Reidel.
Dorling, J. (1972), ‘‘Bayesianism and the Rationality of Science,’’ British Journal
     for the Philosophy of Science 23: 181–190.




                                                                   References 239
Dorling, J. (1973), ‘‘Demonstrative Induction: Its Signiﬁcant Role in the History of
      Physics,’’ Philosophy of Science 40: 360–372.
Douven, I. (2001), ‘‘A Passion for Realism,’’ in review symposium of S. Psillos,
      Scientiﬁc Realism: How Science Tracks Truth, Metascience 10: 354–359.
Downes, S. M. (1992), ‘‘The Importance of Models in Theorizing: A Deﬂationary
      Semantic View,’’ PSA 1992, Volume 1, Philosophy of Science Association:
      142–153.
Dupré, J. (1995), ‘‘Against Scientiﬁc Imperialism,’’ in D. Hull, M. Forbes, and R. M.
      Burian (eds.), PSA 1994, Vol. 2, Philosophy of Science Association: 374–381.
Earman J. (ed.) (1983), Testing Scientiﬁc Theories, University of Minnesota Press.
Earman, J. (1992), Bayes or Bust? A Critical Examination of Bayesian Conﬁrmation
      Theory, MIT Press.
Earman, J. (2002), ‘‘Gauge Matters,’’ Philosophy of Science 69: S209–S220.
Eddington, A. (1939), The Philosophy of Physical Science, Cambridge University
      Press.
Edidin, A. (1983), ‘‘Bootstrapping Without Bootstraps,’’ in J. Earman (ed.), Testing
      Scientiﬁc Theories, University of Minnesota Press: 43–54.
Ellis, B. (1990), Truth and Objectivity, Cambridge University Press.
Ellis, B. (1996), ‘‘What Science Aims to Do,’’ in D. Papineau (ed.), The Philosophy of
      Science, Oxford University Press: 166–193; reprinted from P. Churchland and
      C. Hooker (eds.), Images of Science: Essays on Realism and Empiricism, with a
      Reply by Bas C. van Fraassen., University of Chicago Press, 1985: 48–74.
Elton, L. R. B. (1961), Nuclear Sizes, Oxford University Press.
English, J. (1973), ‘‘Underdetermination: Craig and Ramsey,’’ Journal of Philosophy
      70: 453–462.
Ereshefsky, M. (1995), ‘‘Pluralism, Normative Naturalism and Biological Tax-
      onomy,’’ in D. Hull, M. Forbes, and R. M. Burian (eds.), PSA 1994, Vol. 2,
      Philosophy of Science Association: 382–389.
Etchemendy, J. (1988), ‘‘Tarski on Truth and Logical Consequence,’’ Journal of
      Symbolic Logic 53: 51–79.
Fernández Moreno, F. (2001), ‘‘Tarskian Truth and the Correspondence Theory,’’
      Synthese 126: 123–147.
Fine, A. (1984), ‘‘The Natural Ontological Attitude,’’ in J. Leplin (ed.), Scientiﬁc
      Realism, University of California Press: 83–107.
Fine, A. (1986), ‘‘Unnatural Attitudes: Realist and Instrumentalist Attachments to
      Science,’’ Mind 95: 149–179.
Fine, A. (1991), ‘‘Piecemeal Realism,’’ Philosophical Studies 61: 79–96.
Fine, A. (1996), ‘‘Afterword,’’ in The Shaky Game, University of Chicago Press
      (2nd ed.).
Fine, A. (1998), ‘‘The Viewpoint of No-One in Particular,’’ Proceedings and Ad-
      dresses of the American Philosophical Association, 72: 19.
Fisher, G. (forthcoming), ‘‘Developmental Models and Their Lack of Autonomy,’’
      paper presented to the annual meeting of the British Society for the Philos-
      ophy of Science, Shefﬁeld, July 2000.
Flanagan, O. (1995), ‘‘The Moment of Truth on Dublin Bridge: A Response to
      Andrew Pickering,’’ South Atlantic Quarterly 94: 467–475.
Folse, H. (1985), The Philosophy of Niels Bohr: The Framework of Complementarity,
      North-Holland.
Franklin, A. (1986), The Neglect of Experiment, Cambridge University Press.
Franklin, A. (1995), ‘‘Commentary,’’ PSA 1994, Vol. 2, Philosophy of Science
      Association: 452–457.


240    References
French, S. (1985), Identity and Individuality in Classical and Quantum Physics, PhD
     thesis, University of London.
French, S. (1988), ‘‘Models, Pragmatic Virtues and Limited Scepticism: The Three
     Pillars of Constructive Empiricism,’’ Manuscrito 11: 27–46.
French, S. (1989a), ‘‘A Peircean Approach to the Realism-Empiricism Debate,’’
     Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society 25, 293–307.
French, S. (1989b), ‘‘A Estrutura do Argumento de Newton para a Lei da Grav-
     itação Universal,’’ Cadernos da Historia e Filosoﬁa da Ciencia Serie 2, 1: 33–52.
French, S. (1989c), ‘‘Identity and Individuality in Classical and Quantum Phys-
     ics,’’ Australasian Journal of Philosophy 67: 432–446.
French, S. (1990), ‘‘Rationality, Consistency and Truth,’’ Journal of Non-Classical
     Logic 7: 51–71.
French, S. (1995), ‘‘The Esperable Uberty of Quantum Chromodynamics,’’ Studies
     in History and Philosophy of Physics 26: 87–105.
French, S. (1997), ‘‘Partiality, Pursuit and Practice,’’ in M. L. Dalla Chiara et al.,
     Proceedings of the 10th International Congress on Logic, Methodology and Phi-
     losophy of Science (Dordrecht), Kluwer: 35–52.
French, S. (1999), ‘‘Models and Mathematics in Physics: The Role of Group
     Theory,’’ in J. Butterﬁeld and C. Pagonis (eds.), From Physics to Philosophy
     Cambridge University Press: 187–207.
French, S. (2000), ‘‘The Reasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics: Partial Struc-
     tures and the Application of Group Theory to Physics,’’ Synthese 125:
     103–120.
French, S. (forthcoming a), ‘‘Symmetry, Structure and the Constitution of Ob-
     jects,’’ paper presented at the workshop Symmetries in Physics: New Reﬂec-
     tions, University of Oxford, January 2001; available at www.philosophy.
     ox.ac.uk/physics/contents.html#4.
French, S. (forthcoming b), ‘‘A Model-Theoretic Account of Representation,’’
     Philosophy of Science.
French, S., and Krause, D. (1999), ‘‘The Logic of Quanta,’’ in T. Cao (ed.), Con-
     ceptual Foundations of Quantum Field Theory, Cambridge University Press:
     324–342.
French, S., and Krause, D. (forthcoming), Quantum Individuality.
French, S., and Ladyman, J. (1997), ‘‘Superconductivity and Structures: Revisiting
     the London Account,’’ Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 28:
     363–393.
French, S., and Ladyman, J. (1998), ‘‘A Semantic Perspective on Idealisation in
     Quantum Mechanics,’’ in N. Shanks (ed.), Idealization IX: Idealization in Con-
     temporary Physics: Poznan Studies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the
     Humanities, Rodopi: 51–73.
French, S., and Ladyman, J. (1999), ‘‘Reinﬂating the Semantic Approach,’’ In-
     ternational Studies in the Philosophy of Science 13: 99–117.
French, S., and Ladyman, J. (2003), ‘‘Remodelling Structural Realism: Quantum
     Physics and the Metaphysics of Structure,’’ Synthese.
Friedman, M. (1982), ‘‘Review of The Scientiﬁc Image,’’ Journal of Philosophy 79:
     274–283.
Friedman, M. (1983), Foundations of Space-Time Theories, Princeton University
     Press.
Frisch, M. (preprint), ‘‘The World According to Maxwell,’’ paper given to the
     Research Workshop of the Division of History and Philosophy of Science,
     University of Leeds.


                                                                    References 241
Fuller, S. (1986), Social Epistemology, Indiana University Press.
Garber, D. (1983), ‘‘Old Evidence and Logical Omniscience in Bayesian Con-
      ﬁrmation Theory,’’ in J. Earman (ed.), Testing Scientiﬁc Theories, University of
      Minnesota Press: 99–132.
Gardenfors, D., and Saklin, N. E. (1982), ‘‘Unreliable Probabilities: Risk Taking
      and Decision Making,’’ Synthese 53: 362–386.
Gavroglu, K. (1995), Fritz London: A Scientiﬁc Biography, Cambridge University
      Press.
Giere, R. (1988), Explaining Science: A Cognitive Approach, University of Chicago
      Press.
Giere, R. (1995), ‘‘Viewing Science,’’ in D. Hull, M. Forbes, and R. M. Burian
      (eds.), PSA 1994, Vol. 2, Philosophy of Science Association: 3–16.
Gillies, D. (1986), ‘‘Discussion: In Defense of the Popper-Miller Argument,’’ Phi-
      losophy of Science 53: 110–113.
Gillies, D. (1987), ‘‘Probability and Induction,’’ in G. M. R. Parkinson (ed.), The
      Encyclopaedia of Philosophy, Croom-Helm.
Glymour, G. (1980a), Theory and Evidence, Princeton University Press.
Glymour, C. (1980b), ‘‘Bootstraps and Probabilities,’’ Journal of Philosophy 77:
      691–699.
Gorham, G. (1996), ‘‘Similarity as an Intertheory Relation,’’ Philosophy of Science
      63 (Proceedings): S220–S229.
Gotesky, R. (1968), ‘‘The Uses of Inconsistency,’’ Philosophy and Phenomenological
      Research 28: 471–500.
Gracia, J. J. (1988), Individuality, State University of New York Press.
Grandy, R. (1986), ‘‘Some Misconceptions About Belief,’’ in R. Grandy and
      R. Warner (eds.), Philosophical Grounds of Rationality, Clarendon Press: 317–
      331.
Gremmen, B. (1995), ‘‘The Structure of Scientiﬁc Practice,’’ paper read at the
      10th International Congress of Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Sci-
      ence, August 19–25, 1995, Florence, Italy.
Griesemer, J. R. (1990), ‘‘Modeling in the Museum: On the Role of Remnant
      Models in the Work of Joseph Grinnell,’’ Biology and Philosophy 5: 3–36.
Grobler, A. (1995), ‘‘The Representational and the Non-Representational in
      Models of Scientiﬁc Theories,’’ in W. E. Herfel, W. Krajewski, I. Niiniluoto,
      and R. Wójcicki (eds.), Theories and Models in Science, Poznan Studies in the
      Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, Rodopi: 37–48.
Hacking, I. (1967), ‘‘Slightly More Realistic Personal Probability,’’ Philosophy of
      Science 34: 310–316.
Hacking, I. (1983), Representing and Intervening, Cambridge University Press.
Halmos, P. R. (1960), Naive Set Theory, Van Nostrand.
Hardin, C., and Rosenberg, A. (1982), ‘‘In Defence of Convergent Realism,’’ Phi-
      losophy of Science 49: 604–615.
Hardwig, J. (1985), ‘‘Epistemic Dependence,’’ Journal of Philosophy 82: 335–349.
Hardwig, J. (1991), ‘‘The Role of Trust in Knowledge,’’ Journal of Philosophy 88:
      693–708.
Harman, G. (1986), Change in View, MIT Press.
Harman, P. M. (1982), Metaphysics and Natural Philosophy, Harvester.
Hartmann, S. (1995), ‘‘Models as a Tool for Theory Construction: Some Strategies
      of Preliminary Physics,’’ in W. E. Herfel et al. (eds.), Theories and Models in
      Scientiﬁc Processes, Editions Rodopi: 49–67.




242    References
Hartmann, S. (1996), ‘‘The World as a Process: Simulations in the Natural and
     Social Sciences,’’ in R. Hegselmann et al. (eds.), Simulation and Modelling in the
     Social Sciences from the Philosophy of Science Point of View, Kluwer Academic
     Publishers.
Hartmann, S. (1999), ‘‘Models and Stories in Hadron Physics,’’ in M. Morgan and
     M. Morrison (eds.), Models as Mediators, Cambridge University Press: 326–346.
Hartree, D. R. (1957), The Calculation of Atomic Structures, Wiley.
Havas, K. G. (1993), ‘‘Do We Tolerate Inconsistencies?’’ Dialectica 47: 27–35.
Hawking, S. (1980), Is the End in Sight for Theoretical Physics? Cambridge Uni-
     versity Press.
Hellman, G. (1988), ‘‘The Many Worlds Interpretation of Set Theory,’’ PSA 1988
     Vol. 2, 1988: 445–455.
Hendry, R. (1997), ‘‘Empirical Adequacy and the Semantic Conception of The-
     ories,’’ in T. Childers, P. Kolár, and V. Svoboda (eds.), Logica ’96: Proceedings
     of the 10th International Symposium, Prague, Filosoﬁa: 136–50.
Hendry, R. (1998), ‘‘Models and Approximations in Quantum Chemistry,’’ in
     N. Shanks (ed.), Idealization in Contemporary Physics, Editions Rodopi: 123–
     142.
Herfel, W. (1995), ‘‘Nonlinear Dynamical Models as Concrete Construction,’’ in
     W. E. Herfel et al. (eds.), Theories and Models in Scientiﬁc Processes, Editions
     Rodopi: 69–84.
Hesse, M. (1953–54), ‘‘Models in Physics,’’ British Journal for the Philosophy of
     Science 4: 198–214.
Hesse, M. (1970), Models and Analogies in Science, Oxford University Press.
Hesse, M. (1974), The Structure of Scientiﬁc Inference, Macmillan.
Hesse, M. (1980), Revolutions and Reconstructions in the Philosophy of Science,
     Harvester.
Hettema, H. (1995), ‘‘Bohr’s Theory of the Atom 1913–1923: A Case Study in the
     Progress of Scientiﬁc Research Programmes,’’ Studies in History and Philosophy
     of Modern Physics 26: 307–323.
Heyde, K. (1990), The Nuclear Shell Model, Springer-Verlag.
Heyde, K. (1994), Basic Ideas and Concepts in Nuclear Physics, Institute of Physics
     Publishing.
Hintikka, J., and Niiniluoto, I. (1980), ‘‘Axiomatic Foundation for a Logic of In-
     ductive Generalizations,’’ in R. C. Jeffrey (ed.), Studies in Inductive Logic and
     Probability, Vol. 2, University of California Press: 157–182.
Hodges, W. (1986), ‘‘Truth in a Structure,’’ Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
     86: 135–151.
Hodges, W. (1993), Model Theory, Cambridge University Press.
Hollis, M., and Lukes, S. (eds.) (1982), Rationality and Relativism, MIT Press.
Horton, R. (1967), ‘‘African Traditional Thought and Western Science,’’ Africa
     38: 50–71, 155–187; abridged version in B. R. Wilson (ed.) (1970), Ra-
     tionality, Blackwell.
Horton, R. (1982), ‘‘Tradition and Modernity Revisited,’’ in M. Hollis and S. Lukes
     (eds.), Rationality and Relativism, MIT Press: 201–260.
Horwich, P. (1980), ‘‘The Dispensability of Bootstrap Conditions,’’ Journal of
     Philosophy 77: 691–699.
Horwich, P. (1982), Probability and Evidence, Cambridge University Press.
Horwich, P. (1983), ‘‘Explanations of Irrelevance,’’ in J. Earman (ed.), Testing
     Scientiﬁc Theories, University of Minnesota Press: 55–65.




                                                                    References 243
Horwich, P. (1991), ‘‘On the Nature and Norms of Theoretical Commitment,’’
      Philosophy of Science 58: 1–14.
Howson, C. (1985), ‘‘Some Recent Objections to the Bayesian Theory of Support,’’
      British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 36: 305–309.
Hoyer, U. (1981), ‘‘Introduction,’’ in Neils Bohr Collected Works, Vol. 2, ed.
      U. Hoyer, North-Holland: 3–10.
Hoyningen-Huene, P. (1993), Reconstructing Scientiﬁc Revolutions: Thomas S. Kuhn’s
      Philosophy of Science, University of Chicago Press.
Huggett, N. (1997), ‘‘Identity, Quantum Mechanics and Common Sense,’’ The
      Monist 80: 118–130.
Hughes, R. I. G. (1993), ‘‘Theoretical Explanation,’’ in P. A. French, T. E. Uehling
      Jr., and H. K. Wettstein (eds.), Midwest Studies in Philosophy, Vol. 18: Philos-
      ophy of Science, University of Notre Dame Press: 132–153.
Hughes, R. I. G. (1997), ‘‘Models and Representation,’’ Philosophy of Science 64
      (Proceedings): S325–S336.
Hutten, E. H. (1953–54), ‘‘The Role of Models in Physics,’’ British Journal for the
      Philosophy of Science 4: 284–301.
Irzik, G., and Gr€  unberg, T. (1995), ‘‘Carnap and Kuhn: Arch Enemies or Close
      Allies?’’ British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 46: 285–307.
James, W. (1885), ‘‘The Function of Cognition,’’ Mind 10: 27–44.
James, W. (1905), ‘‘The Sentiment of Rationality,’’ in W. James, The Will to
      Believe, Longmans, Green: 63–110.
James, W. (1907a), Pragmatism, Longmans, Green.
James, W. (1907b), ‘‘Professor Pratt on Truth,’’ in W. James, The Meaning of Truth,
      Longmans, Green: 162–179.
James, W. (1907c), ‘‘A Word More About Truth,’’ in W. James, The Meaning of
      Truth, Longmans, Green: 136–161.
James, W. (1932), The Meaning of Truth, Longmans, Green.
Jammer, M. (1966), The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics, McGraw-
      Hill.
Jaskowski, S. (1948), ‘‘Rachunek zdán dla systemóv dedukcyjnych sprzecznych,’’
      Studia Societatis Scientiarum Torunensis, Sectio A, I: 171–172.
Jaskowski, S. (1969), ‘‘Propositional Calculus for Contradictory Deductive Sys-
      tems,’’ Studia Logica 24: 143–157.
Jeffrey, R. (1983), ‘‘Bayesianism with a Human Face,’’ in J. Earman (ed.), Testing
      Scientiﬁc Theories, University of Minnesota Press: 99–132.
Jeffreys, H. (1961), Theory of Probability, Oxford University Press.
Kaiser, M. (1991), ‘‘From Rocks to Graphs-The Shaping of Phenomena,’’
      Synthese 89: 111–133.
Kaiser, M. (1995), ‘‘The Independence of Scientiﬁc Phenomena,’’ in W. E. Herfel et
      al. (eds.), Theories and Models in Scientiﬁc Processes, Editions Rodopi: 180–200.
Kart, I. (1991), The Critique of Judgement, Clarendon Press.
Kaplan, M. (1981), ‘‘Rational Acceptance,’’ Philosophical Studies 40: 129–145.
Keynes, J. M. (1921), ‘‘A Treatise on Probability,’’ in Collected Writings of John
      Maynard Keynes, Macmillan (1973).
Kitcher, P. (1993), The Advancement of Science, Oxford University Press.
Klein, M. (1970), Paul Ehrenfest, Vol. 1, North-Holland.
Knudsen, O. (forthcoming), ‘‘O. W. Richardson and the Electron Theory of Matter,
      1901–1916.’’
Koertge, N. (1968), A Study of Relations Between Scientiﬁc Theories: A Test of the
      General Correspondence Principle, Ph.D. Thesis, University of London.


244    References
Koertge, N. (1987), ‘‘Reﬂections of Empirical, External and Sociological Studies of
    Science,’’ in A. Fine et al. (eds.), PSA 1986, Vol. 2, Philosophy of Science
    Association: 152–159.
Koertge, N. (1993), ‘‘Ideology, Heuristics and Rationality in the Context of Dis-
    covery,’’ in S. French and H. Kamminga, Correspondence, Invariance and
    Heuristics, D. Reidel: 125–136.
Koopman, B. O. (1940), ‘‘The Axioms and Algebra of Intuitive Probability,’’ An-
    nals of Mathematics 41: 269–292.
Krause, D., and French, S. (1995), ‘‘A Formal Framework for Quantum Non-
    Individuality,’’ Synthese 102: 195–214.
Kroes, P. (1989), ‘‘Structural Analogies Between Physical Systems,’’ British
    Journal for the Philosophy of Science 40: 145–154.
Kuhn, T. S. (1970), The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, University of Chicago
    Press (1964).
Kuhn, T. S. (1993), ‘‘Introduction,’’ PSA 1992, Vol. 2, Philosophy of Science
    Association: 3–5.
Kuipers, T. A. F. (1978), Studies in Inductive Logic and Rational Expectation, Reidel.
Kuipers, T. A. F. (1980), ‘‘A Survey of Inductive Systems,’’ in R. C. Jeffrey
    (ed.), Studies in Inductive Logic, Vol. 2, University of California Press:
    183–192.
Kuipers, T. A. F. (2000), From Instrumentalism to Constructive Realism, Kluwer.
Kyburg, H. (1974), The Logical Foundations of Statistical Inference, D. Reidel.
Kyburg, H. (1987), ‘‘The Hobgoblin,’’ The Monist 70: 141–151.
Ladyman, J. (1998), ‘‘What Is Structural Realism?’’ Studies in History and Philos-
    ophy of Science 29: 409–424.
Ladyman, J., Douven, I., Horsten, L., and van Fraassen, B. (1997), ‘‘A Defence of
    van Fraassen’s Critique of Abductive Reasoning: A Reply to Psillos,’’ Philos-
    ophical Quarterly 47: 305–321.
Lakatos, I. (1970), ‘‘Falsiﬁcation and the Methodology of Scientiﬁc Research
    Programs,’’ in I. Lakatos and A. Musgrave (eds.), Criticism and the Growth of
    Knowledge, Cambridge University Press: 91–195.
Langevin, P., and de Broglie, M. (eds.), (1912), La Théorie du rayonnement et les
    quanta, Gauthier-Villars.
Langholm, T. (1988), Partiality, Truth and Persistence, Center for the Study of
    Language and Information, Stanford.
Latour, B. (1987), Science in Action, Harvard University Press.
Laudan, L. (1977), Progress and Its Problems, University of California Press.
Laudan, L. (1980), ‘‘Why Was the Logic of Discovery Abandoned?’’ in T. Nickels
    (ed.), Scientiﬁc Discovery, Logic and Rationality, D. Reidel: 173–183.
Laudan, L. (1984), ‘‘Explaining the Success of Science,’’ in J. Cushing et al. (eds.),
    Science and Reality, Notre Dame University Press.
Laudan, L. (1989), ‘‘If It Ain’t Broke, Don’t Fix It,’’ British Journal for the Philos-
    ophy of Science 40: 369–375.
Laudan, L. (1996), ‘‘A Confutation of Convergent Realism,’’ in D. Papineau (ed.),
    The Philosophy of Science, Oxford University Press: 107–138; originally pub-
    lished in Philosophy of Science (1981), 48: 19–49.
Laudan, L., and Leplin, J. (1991), ‘‘Empirical Equivalence and Underdetermination,’’
    Journal of Philosophy 85: 1–23.
Laymon, R. (1985), ‘‘Idealizations and the Testing of Theories by Experimenta-
    tion,’’ in P. Achinstein and O. Hannaway (eds.), Experiment and Observation in
    Modern Science, MIT Press: 147–173.


                                                                    References 245
Laymon, R. (1987), ‘‘Using Scott Domains to Explicate the Notions of Approx-
     imate and Idealized Data,’’ Philosophy of Science 54: 194–221.
Laymon, R. (1988), ‘‘The Michelson-Morley Experiment and the Appraisal of
     Theories,’’ in A. Donovan et al. (eds.), Scrutinizing Science, Kluwer: 245–266.
Laymon, R. (1989), ‘‘Cartwright and the Lying Laws of Physics,’’ Journal of Phi-
     losophy 86: 353–372.
Levi, I. (1987), ‘‘The Demons of Decision,’’ The Monist 70: 193–211.
Lindley, D. V. (1965), Introduction to Probability and Statistics from a Bayesian
     Viewpoint, Cambridge University Press.
Lipton, P. (1996), ‘‘Is the Best Good Enough?’’ in D. Papineau (ed.), The Philosophy
     of Science, Oxford University Press: 93–106.
London, F. (1950), Superﬂuids, Vol. 1, Wiley.
London, F. (1954), Superﬂuids, Vol. 2, Wiley.
London, F., and London, H. (1935), ‘‘The Electromagnetic Equations of the Supra-
     conductor,’’ Proceedings of the Royal Society (London) A149: 71–88.
Lukasiewicz, J. (1971), ‘‘On the Principle of Contradiction in Aristotle,’’ Review of
     Metaphysics 24: 485–509.
Lukes, S. (1970), ‘‘Some Problems About Rationality,’’ in B. Wilson (ed.), Ra-
     tionality, Harper and Row: 193–213.
Lynch, M. (1992a), ‘‘Extending Wittgenstein: The Pivotal Move from Epistemol-
     ogy to the Sociology of Science,’’ in A. Pickering (ed.), Science as Practice and
     Culture, University of Chicago Press: 215–265.
Lynch, M. (1992b), ‘‘From the ‘Will to Theory’ to the Discursive Collage: A Reply
     to Bloor’s ‘Left and Right Wittgensteinians,’’’ in A. Pickering (ed.), Science as
     Practice and Culture, University of Chicago Press: 283–300.
Mac Lane, S. (1996), ‘‘Structure in Mathematics,’’ Philosophia Mathematica 4:
     174–183.
Madan, D. B. (1983), ‘‘Inconsistent Theories as Scientiﬁc Objectives,’’ Philosophy of
     Science 50: 453–470.
Maher, P. (1990), ‘‘Acceptance Without Belief,’’ PSA 1990, Vol. 1, Philosophy of
     Science Association: 381–392.
Maidens, A. (1998), ‘‘Idealization, Heuristics and the Principle of Equivalence,’’ in
     N. Shanks (ed.), Idealization in Contemporary Physics, Rodopi: 183–200.
Malament, D. (1995), ‘‘Is Newtonian Cosmology Really Inconsistent?’’ Philosophy
     of Science 62: 489–510.
Martin, M. W. (1986), Self-Deception and Morality, University Press of Kansas.
Masterman, M. (1970), ‘‘The Nature of a Paradigm,’’ in I. Lakatos and A. Mus-
     grave (eds.), Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, Cambridge University
     Press: 59–90.
Mates, B. (1974), ‘‘Austin, Strawson, Tarski and Truth,’’ in L. Henkin et al. (eds.),
     Proceedings of the Tarski Symposium, American Mathematical Society: 385–396.
Maxwell, J. C. (1965), The Scientiﬁc Papers of James Clerk Maxwell, ed. W. D. Niven,
     Cambridge University Press.
McKinsey, J. C. C., Sugar, A. C., and Suppes, P. (1953), ‘‘Axiomatic Foundations of
     Classical Particle Mechanics,’’ Journal of Rational Mechanics 2: 253–272.
McMullin, E. (1968), ‘‘What Do Physical Models Tell Us?’’ in B. van Rootsellar and
     J. F. Staal (eds.), Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science III, North-
     Holland: 385–400.
McMullin, E. (1976), ‘‘The Fertility of Theory and the Unit for Appraisal in Sci-
     ence,’’ in R. S. Cohen et al. (eds.), Essays in Memory of Imre Lakatos, Reidel:
     395–432.


246    References
Mehra, J., and Rechenberg, H. (1982), Historical Development of Quantum Mecha-
     nics, Springer.
Mele, A. (1987), ‘‘Recent Work on Self-Deception,’’ American Philosophical Quar-
     terly 24: 2–17.
Mikenberg, I., da Costa, N. C. A., and Chuaqui, R. (1986), ‘‘Pragmatic Truth and
     Approximation to Truth,’’ Journal of Symbolic Logic 51: 201–221.
Miller, D. (1994), Critical Rationalism: A Restatement and Defence, Open Court.
Mitchell, S. (1988), ‘‘Constructive Empiricism and Anti-Realism,’’ PSA 1988,
     Vol. 1, Philosophy of Science Association: 174–180.
Morrison, M. (1995), ‘‘Uniﬁed Theories and Disparate Things,’’ in D. Hull, M.
     Forbes, and R. M. Burian (eds.), PSA 1994, Vol. 2, Philosophy of Science
     Association: 365–373.
Morrison, M. (1999), ‘‘Models as Autonomous Agents,’’ in M. Morgan and
     M. Morrison (eds.), Models as Mediators, Cambridge University Press:
     38–65.
Moser, P. K. (1983), ‘‘William James’ Theory of Truth,’’ Topoi 2: 217–222.
Mostowski, A. (1967), ‘‘Review of N. Bourbaki’s Théorie des Ensembles,’’ Math-
     ematical Reviews 34: 425–426.
Moulines, C. U. (1976), ‘‘Approximate Application of Empirical Theories,’’ Er-
     kenntnis 10: 201–227.
Musgrave, A. (1996), ‘‘NOA’s Ark: Fine for Realism,’’ in D. Papineau (ed.), The
     Philosophy of Science, Oxford University Press: 45–60; Philosophical Quarterly
     39 (1989): 383–398.
Nagel, E. (1961), The Structure of Science, Hackett.
Nagel, E. (1963), ‘‘Carnap’s Theory of Induction,’’ in P. A. Schilpp (ed.), The
     Philosophy of Rudolf Carnap, Open Court Press.
Nagel, E., Suppes, P., and Tarski, A. (1962), Logic, Methodology and the Philosophy
     of Science (Proceedings of the 1960 International Congress), Stanford University
     Press.
Nersessian, N. (1993), ‘‘How Do Scientists Think? Capturing the Dynamics of
     Conceptual Change in Science,’’ in R. N. Giere (ed.), Cognitive Models in Sci-
     ence, Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 15, University of
     Minnesota Press: 3–44.
Nickles, T. (1977), ‘‘Heuristics and Justiﬁcation in Scientiﬁc Research,’’ in
     F. Suppe (ed.), The Structure of Scientiﬁc Theories (2nd ed.), University of Illinois
     Press: 571–589.
Nickles, T. (1987), ‘‘Twixt Method and Madness,’’ in N. J. Nersessian (ed.), The
     Process of Science, Martinus Nijhoff: 42–67.
Norton, J. D. (1987), ‘‘The Logical Inconsistency of the Old Quantum Theory of
     Black Body Radiation,’’ Philosophy of Science 54: 327–350.
Norton, J. D. (1993), ‘‘A Paradox in Newtonian Gravitation Theory,’’ in PSA
     1992, Vol. 2, Philosophy of Science Association: 412–420.
Norton, J. D. (1995), ‘‘The Force of Newtonian Cosmology: Acceleration Is Rel-
     ative,’’ Philosophy of Science 62: 511–522.
Norton, J. D., and Bain, J. (forthcoming), ‘‘What Should Philosophers of Science
     Learn from the History of the Electron?’’ in A. Warwick and J. Buchwald
     (eds.), The Electron and the Birth of Microphysics, MIT Press.
Nowak, L. (1995), ‘‘Anti-Realism, (Supra-) Realism and Idealization,’’ in W. E.
     Herfel, W. Krajewski, I. Niiniluoto, and R. Wójcicki (eds.), Theories and Models
     in Science, Poznan Studies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Huma-
     nities, Rodopi: 225–242.


                                                                      References 247
Olivé, L. (1985), ‘‘Realismo y antirealismo en la concepción semántica de las
     teorı́as,’’ Crı´tica 17: 31–38.
Oliveira, M. B. de (1985), ‘‘The Problem of Induction: A New Approach,’’ British
     Journal for the Philosophy of Science 36: 129–145.
O’Neill, J. (1986), ‘‘Formalism, Hamilton and Complex Numbers,’’ Studies in
     History and Philosophy of Science 17: 351–372.
Pagonis, C. (1996), Quantum Mechanics and Scientiﬁc Realism, Ph.D. Thesis,
     Cambridge University.
Pais, A. (1991), Niels Bohr’s Times, Oxford University Press.
Papineau, D. (1996), ‘‘Introduction,’’ in D. Papineau (ed.), The Philosophy of Sci-
     ence, Oxford University Press: 1–20.
Peirce, C. S. (1931–35), Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, Vols. 1–6.
     Harvard University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1940), The Philosophy of Peirce, ed. J. Buchler, Routledge and Kegan
     Paul.
Pérez Ransanz, A. R. (1985), ‘‘El concepto de teorı́a empı́rica según van Fraas-
     sen,’’ Crı´tica 17: 3–12.
Perry, J. (1986), ‘‘From Worlds to Situations,’’ Journal of Philosophical Logic 15
     (1986): 83–107.
Pickering, A. (1984), Constructing Quarks, Edinburgh University Press.
Pickering, A. (1990), ‘‘Knowledge, Practice and Mere Construction,’’ Social Studies
     of Science 20: 682–729.
Pickering, A. (1992), ‘‘From Science as Knowledge to Science as Practice,’’ in
     A. Pickering (ed.), Science as Practice and Culture, University of Chicago
     Press: 1–26.
Pickering, A. (1995a), The Mangle of Practice: Time, Agency and Chance, Chicago
     University Press.
Pickering, A. (1995b), ‘‘Concepts and the Mangle of Practice: Constructing
     Quaternions,’’ South Atlantic Quarterly 94: 417–465.
Pickering, A. (1995c), ‘‘Explanation, Agency and Metaphysics: A Reply to Owen
     Flanagan,’’ South Atlantic Quarterly 94: 475–480.
Pickering, A. (1995d), ‘‘After Representation: Science Studies in the Performative
     Idiom,’’ PSA 1994, Vol. 2: 413–419.
Pickering, A., and Stephanides, A. (1992), ‘‘Constructing Quaternions: On the
     Analysis of Conceptual Practice,’’ in A. Pickering (ed.), Science as Practice and
     Culture; University of Chicago Press: 139–167.
Pierson, R. (1995), ‘‘The Epistemic Authority of Expertise,’’ PSA 1994, Vol. 1,
     Philosophy of Science Association: 398–405.
Poincaré, H. (1905), Science and Hypothesis, Dover (1952).
Popper, K., and Miller, D. (1983), ‘‘A Proof of the Impossibility of Inductive
     Probability,’’ Nature 302: 687–688.
Popper, K. R. (1940), ‘‘What Is Dialectic?’’ Mind 49 (1940): 403–436.
Popper, K. R. (1972), The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery, Hutchinson.
Portides, D. (2000), Representation Models as Devices for Scientiﬁc Theory Applica-
     tions vs. the Semantic View of Scientiﬁc Theories, Ph.D. thesis, London School of
     Economics.
Post, H. R. (1971), ‘‘Correspondence, Invariance and Heuristics,’’ Studies in His-
     tory and Philosophy of Science 2: 213–255.
Priest, G. (1987), In Contradiction, Martinus Nijhoff.
Priest, G., and Routley, R. (1984), ‘‘Introduction: Paraconsistent Logics,’’ Studia
     Logica 43: 3–16.


248    References
Priest, G., Routley, R., and Norman, J. (1989), Paraconsistent Logic: Essays on the
      Inconsistent, Philosophia.
Psillos, S. (1995), ‘‘The Cognitive Interplay Between Theories and Models: The
      Case of 19th Century Optics,’’ in W. E. Herfel et al. (eds.), Theories and Models
      in Scientiﬁc Processes, Editions Rodopi: 105–133.
Psillos, S. (1999), Scientiﬁc Realism: How Science Tracks Truth, Routledge.
Psillos, S. (2000), ‘‘The Present State of the Scientiﬁc Realism Debate,’’ British
      Journal for the Philosophy of Science 51: 705–728.
Psillos, S. (2001), ‘‘Author’s response,’’ in ‘‘Quests of a Realist,’’ review sympo-
      sium of S. Psillos, Scientiﬁc Realism: How Science Tracks Truth, Metascience 10:
      366–371.
Putnam, H. (1975a), Mathematics, Matter and Method, Vol. 1, Cambridge Uni-
      versity Press.
Putnam, H. (1975b), ‘‘Degree of Conﬁrmation and Inductive Logic,’’ in Mathe-
      matics, Matter and Method, Vol. 1, Cambridge University Press.
Putnam, H. (1978), Meaning and the Moral Sciences, Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Putnam, H. (1995), Pragmatism: An Open Question, Blackwell.
Quinton, A. (1982), Thoughts and Thinkers, Duckworth.
Redhead, M. L. G. (1975), ‘‘Symmetry in Intertheory Relations,’’ Synthese 32:
      77–112.
Redhead, M. L. G. (1980), ‘‘Models in Physics,’’ British Journal for the Philosophy of
      Science 31: 145–163.
Redhead, M. L. G. (1985), ‘‘On the Impossibility of Inductive Probability,’’ British
      Journal for the Philosophy of Science 36: 185–191.
Redhead, M. L. G. (1993), ‘‘Is the End of Physics in Sight?’’ in S. French and H.
      Kamminga (eds.), Correspondence, Invariance and Heuristics, D. Reidel:
      327–341.
Redhead, M. L. G. (2002), ‘‘The Interpretation of Gauge Symmetry,’’ in M.
      Kuhlmann, M. Lyre, and A. Wayne (eds.), Ontological Aspects of Quantum Field
      Theory: Proceedings of the Bielefeld Conference on Ontological Aspects of Quantum
      Field Theory, World Scientiﬁc: 281–301.
Reichenbach, H. (1938), Experience and Prediction, University of Chicago Press.
Reichenbach, H. (1949), The Theory of Probability, University of California Press.
Reiner, R., and Pearson, R. (1995), ‘‘Hacking’s Experimental Realism: An Un-
      tenable Middle Ground,’’ Philosophy of Science 62: 60–69.
Reisch, G. (1991), ‘‘Did Kuhn Kill Logical Positivism?’’ Philosophy of Science 58:
      264–277.
Rescher, N. (1968), Topics in Philosophical Logic, Reidel.
Rescher, N. (1973), The Primacy of Practice, Blackwell.
Rescher, N. (1978), Peirce’s Philosophy of Science, University of Notre Dame Press.
Rescher, N., and Brandom, R. (1980), The Logic of Inconsistency, Blackwell.
Richardson, O. W. (1916), The Electron Theory of Matter, Cambridge University
      Press.
Rorty, A. (1972), ‘‘Belief and Self-Deception,’’ Inquiry 5: 387–410.
Rosenkrantz, R. D. (1977), Inference, Method and Decision: Towards a Bayesian
      Philosophy of Science, Reidel.
Rosenkrantz, R. D. (1983), ‘‘Why Glymour Is a Bayesian,’’ in J. Earman (ed.),
      Testing Scientiﬁc Theories, University of Minnesota Press: 69–98.
Rueger, A. (1990), ‘‘Independence from Future Theories: A Research Strategy in
      Quantum Theory,’’ in A. Fine, M. Forbes, and L. Wessels (eds.), PSA 1990
      Vol. 1, PSA: 203–211.


                                                                    References 249
Russell, B. (1912), The Problems of Philosophy, Oxford University Press.
Russell, B. (1948), Human Knowledge, Simon and Schuster.
Russell, B. (1954), The Analysis of Matter, Dover.
Ryle, G. (1971), ‘‘Why Are the Calculuses of Logic and Arithmetic Applicable to
     Reality?’’ in Collected Papers, Vol. 2, Barnes and Noble: 226–233.
Salmon, W. (1966), ‘‘The Foundations of Scientiﬁc Inference,’’ in R. G. Colodny
     (ed.), Mind and Cosmos, University of Pittsburgh Press: 135–275.
Salmon, W. (1978), ‘‘Unﬁnished Business: The Problem of Induction,’’ Philo-
     sophical Studies 33: 1–79.
Sapir, E. (1929), ‘‘The Status of Linguistics as a Science,’’ Language 5: 207–
     214.
Schiffer, S. (1986), ‘‘The Real Trouble with Propositions,’’ in R. J. Bogdan (ed.),
     Belief: Form, Content and Function, Oxford University Press: 83–117.
Schotch, P. K. (1993), ‘‘Paraconsistent Logic: The View from the Right,’’ PSA
     1992, Vol. 2, Philosophy of Science Association: 421–429.
Schotch, P. K., and Jennings, R. E. (1980), ‘‘Inference and Necessity,’’ Journal of
     Philosophical Logic 9: 329–340.
Shapere, D. (1969), ‘‘Notes Towards a Post-Positivistic Interpretation of Science,’’
     in P. Achinstein and S. F. Barker (eds.), The Legacy of Logical Positivism, Johns
     Hopkins University Press: 115–160.
Shapere, D. (1977), ‘‘Scientiﬁc Theories and Their Domains,’’ in F. Suppe (ed.), The
     Structure of Scientiﬁc Theories, University of Illinois Press 1977: 518–565.
Shapere, D. (1982), ‘‘The Concept of Observation in Science and Philosophy,’’
     Philosophy of Science 49: 485–525.
Shimony, A. (1970), ‘‘Scientiﬁc Inference,’’ in R. G. Colodny (ed.), The Nature and
     Function of Scientiﬁc Theories, University of Pittsburgh Press: 79–172.
Sklar, L. (1977), ‘‘Facts, Conventions and Assumptions in the Theory of Space-
     Time,’’ in J. Earman, C. Glymour, and J. Stachel (eds.), Foundations of Space-
     Time Theories, University of Minnesota Press: 206–274.
Smith, J. (1988a), ‘‘Scientiﬁc Reasoning or Damage Control: Alternative Proposals
     for Reasoning with Inconsistent Representations of the World,’’ PSA 1988,
     Vol. 1, PSA: 241–248.
Smith, J. (1988b), ‘‘Inconsistency and Scientiﬁc Reasoning,’’ Studies in History and
     Philosophy of Science 19: 429–445.
Smith, J. E. (1978), Purpose and Thought: The Meaning of Pragmatism, University of
     Chicago Press.
Sperber, D. (1975), Rethinking Symbolism, trans. A. Morton, Cambridge University
     Press.
Sperber, D. (1982), ‘‘Apparently Irrational Beliefs,’’ in M. Hollis and S. Lukes
     (eds.), Rationality and Relativism, MIT Press: 149–180.
Stachel, J. (1983), ‘‘Comments on ‘Some Logical Problems Suggested by Empirical
     Theories’ by Professor Dalla Chiara,’’ in R. S. Cohen and M. W. Wartofsky
     (eds.), Language, Logic and Method, D. Reidel: 91–102.
Stalnaker, R. (1986), ‘‘Possible Worlds and Situations,’’ Journal of Philosophical
     Logic 15: 109–123.
Stalnaker, R. C. (1987), Inquiry, MIT Press.
Stegm€ uller, W. (1979), The Structuralist View of Theories, Berlin.
Stich, S. (1984), ‘‘Could Man Be an Irrational Animal?’’ Synthese 64: 115–135.
Suárez, M. (1999a), ‘‘Theories, Models and Representations,’’ in M. Morgan and
     M. Morrison (eds.), Models as Mediators, Cambridge University Press: 168–
     196.


250    References
Suárez, M. (1999b), ‘‘Theories, Models and Representations,’’ in L. Magnani, N. J.
     Nersessian, and P. Thagard (eds.), Model-Based Reasoning in Scientiﬁc Dis-
     covery, Kluwer: 75–83.
Suárez, M. (preprint), ‘‘Idealization and the Semantic View of Scientiﬁc Theories.’’
Suppe, F. (1977), The Structure of Scientiﬁc Theories, University of Illinois Press.
Suppe, F. (1989), Scientiﬁc Realism and Semantic Conception of Theories, University
     of Illinois Press.
Suppe, F. (2000), ‘‘Understanding Scientiﬁc Theories: An Assessment of Devel-
     opments 1969–1998,’’ Philosophy of Science 67 (Proceedings): S102–S115.
Suppes, P. (1957), Introduction to Logic, Van Nostrand.
Suppes, P. (1961), ‘‘A Comparison of the Meaning and Uses of Models in
     Mathematics and the Empirical Sciences,’’ in H. Freudenthal (ed.), The Concept
     and the Role of the Model in Mathematics and Natural and Social Sciences,
     D. Reidel: 163–177.
Suppes, P. (1962), ‘‘Models of Data,’’ in E. Nagel, P. Suppes, and A. Tarski (eds.),
     Logic, Methodology and the Philosophy of Science: Proceedings of the 1960 In-
     ternational Congress. Stanford University Press: 252–267.
Suppes, P. (1967), ‘‘What Is a Scientiﬁc Theory?’’ in S. Morgenbesser (ed.), Phi-
     losophy of Science Today, Basic Books: 55–67.
Suppes, P. (1968), ‘‘The Desirability of Formalization in Science,’’ Journal of Phi-
     losophy 65: 651–664.
Suppes, P. (1969), Studies in the Methodology and Foundations of Science, D. Reidel.
Suppes, P. (1970), Set-Theoretical Structures in Science (mimeograph), Stanford
     University.
Suppes, P. (1988), ‘‘Philosophical Implications of Tarski’s Work,’’ Journal of
     Symbolic Logic 53: 80–91.
Tarski, A. (1935), ‘‘The Concept of Truth in Formalized Languages,’’ in A. Tarski,
     Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics: Papers from 1923 to 1938, Clarendon
     Press (1956): 152–278.
Tarski, A. (1936), ‘‘The Establishment of Scientiﬁc Semantics,’’ in A. Tarski, Logic,
     Semantics, Metamathematics: Papers from 1923 to 1938, Clarendon Press
     (1956): 401–408.
Tarski, A. (1953), ‘‘A General Method in Proofs of Undecidability,’’ in A. Tarski,
     A. Mostowski, and R. M. Robinson (eds.), Undecidable Theories, North-Holland.
Teller, P. (1975), ‘‘Shimony’s A Priori Arguments for Tempered Personalism,’’ in
     G. Maxwell and R. M. Anderson (eds.), Induction, Probability and Conﬁrmation,
     University of Minnesota Press: 166–203.
Teller, P. (1995), An Interpretive Introduction to Quantum Field Theory, Princeton
     University Press.
Thayer, H. S. (1983), ‘‘James’ Theory of Truth: A Reply,’’ Topoi 2: 223–226.
Thompson, P. (1989), ‘‘Explanation in the Semantic Conception of Theory
     Structure,’’ PSA 1988 Vol. 2: 286–296.
Toulmin, S. (1953), The Philosophy of Science, Hutchinson.
Truesdell, C. (1984), ‘‘Suppesian Stews,’’ in An Idiot’s Fugitive Essays on Science:
     Methods, Criticism, Training, Circumstances, Springer Verlag: 503–579.
Turney, P. (1990), ‘‘Embeddability, Syntax, and Semantics in Accounts of Sci-
     entiﬁc Theories,’’ Journal of Philosophical Logic 19: 429–451.
Ullian, J. S. (1990), ‘‘Learning and Meaning,’’ in R. B. Barrett and R. F. Gibson
     (eds.), Perspectives on Quine, Blackwell: 336–346.
Van Fraassen, B. (1970), ‘‘On the Extension of Beth’s Semantics of Theories,’’
     Philosophy of Science 37: 325–334.


                                                                  References 251
Van Fraassen, B. (1977), ‘‘Discussion,’’ in F. Suppe (ed.), The Structure of Scientiﬁc
    Theories (2nd ed.), University of Illinois Press: 598–599.
Van Fraassen, B. (1980), The Scientiﬁc Image, Oxford University Press.
Van Fraassen, B. (1983), ‘‘Glymour on Evidence and Explanation,’’ in J. Earman
    (ed.), Testing Scientiﬁc Theories, University of Minnesota Press: 25–42.
Van Fraassen, B. (1985a), ‘‘Empiricism in the Philosophy of Science,’’ in
    P. Churchland and C. Hooker (eds.), Images of Science, University of Chicago
    Press: 245–308.
Van Fraassen, B. (1985b), ‘‘On the Question of Identiﬁcation of a Scientiﬁc The-
    ory,’’ Crı´tica 17: 21–25.
Van Fraassen, B. (1989), Laws and Symmetry, Oxford University Press.
Van Fraassen, B. (1991), Quantum Mechanics: An Empiricist View, Oxford Uni-
    versity Press.
Van Fraassen, B. (1994), ‘‘Interpretation of Science: Science as Interpretation,’’ in
    J. Hilgevoord (ed.), Physics and Our View of the World, Cambridge University
    Press: 169–187.
Van Fraassen, B. (1997), ‘‘Structure and Perspective: Philosophical Perplexity and
    Paradox,’’ in M. L. Dalla Chiara et al. (eds.), Logic and Scientiﬁc Methods,
    Kluwer Academic Publishers: 511–520.
Vanquickenborne, L. G. (1991), ‘‘Quantum Chemistry of the Hydrogen Bond,’’ in
    P. L. Huyskens, W. A. P. Luck, and T. Zeegers-Huyskens (eds.), Intermolecular
    Forces: An Introduction to Modern Methods and Results, Springer-Verlag: 31–53.
Vaught, R. L. (1974), ‘‘Model Theory Before 1945,’’ in L. Henkin et al. (eds.), Pro-
    ceedings of the Tarski Symposium, American Mathematical Society: 153–172.
Von Neumann, J. (1955), Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Prin-
    ceton University Press (1932).
Von Weizsäcker, C. F. (1935), ‘‘Zur Theorie der Kernmassen,’’ Zeitschrift f€
                                                                            ur Physik
    96 (1935): 431–458.
Von Wright, G. H. (1951), A Treatise on Induction and Probability, Harcourt.
Whitt, L. A. (1990), Theory Pursuit: Between Discovery and Acceptance,’’ in
    A. Fine, M. Forbes, and L. Wessels (eds.), PSA 1990, Vol. 1, PSA: 467–483.
Wittgenstein, L. (1958), Philosophical Investigations, trans. G. E. M. Anscombe,
    Blackwell.
Wojcicki, R. (1974), ‘‘Set Theoretic Representations of Empirical Phenomena,’’
    Journal of Philosophical Logic 3: 337–343.
Wojcicki, R. (1975), ‘‘The Factual Content of Empirical Theories,’’ in J. Hintikka
    (ed.), Rudolf Carnap, Logical Empiricist, Reidel: 95–122.
Woodward, J. (1989), ‘‘Data and Phenomena,’’ Synthese 79: 393–472.
Worrall, J. (1984), ‘‘The Background to the Forefront,’’ PSA 1984, Vol. 2, Phi-
    losophy of Science Association.
Worrall, J. (1996), ‘‘Structural Realism: The Best of Both Worlds?’’ in D. Papineau
    (ed.). The Philosophy of Science, Oxford University Press: 139–165 (originally
    published in Dialectica [1989] 43: 99–124).
Worrall, J. (2000), ‘‘Miracles and Models: Saving Structural Realism?’’ paper
    given to the Annual Meeting of the British Society for the Philosophy of
    Science, Shefﬁeld.
Wrinch, D., and Jeffreys, H. (1921), ‘‘On Certain Fundamental Principles of Sci-
    entiﬁc Inquiry,’’ Philosophical Magazine 42: 369–390.
Wylie, A. (1986), ‘‘Arguments for Scientiﬁc Realism: The Ascending Spiral,’’
    American Philosophical Quarterly 23: 287–297.




252    References
         INDEX

Acceptance, 20, 61–64, 79–83, 86–88,      Apostel, L., 205 n.2, 207 n.19, 207 n.22,
     90, 96–98, 100–106, 115, 127,             209 n.35, 219 n.36, 232 n.40
     134, 138, 148, 153, 165, 215         Approximate truth. See Truth,
     n.25, 219 n.29, 220 n.48                  approximate
  and commitment, 79–80, 87–89,           Approximation, 17, 50, 58, 75, 82, 87,
     90–91, 97–98, 106–106, 153,               92, 94, 102, 105, 120–123, 126,
     213 n.2                                   148–150, 153, 161, 193, 217
  and General correspondence principle,        n.13, 222 n.16, 229 n.3
     81–83                                Aristotle, 8, 167, 170, 216 n.7, 228 n.1
  partial, 79–83, 106                     Axiomatisation, 22–28, 38–39, 202
Achinstein, P., 40, 41, 45, 46–48, 51,         n.5, 203 n.26
     52–54, 57, 79, 108, 206 nn.4–5,
     206 n.17, 207 n.18, 209 n.30,        Baird, D., 78–79, 210 n.42, 215 n.22
     210 n.41, 213 n.56                   Barnes, B., 108–109, 198, 233 n.3
Agency, 109–110                           Bayes’ theorem, 136–138, 142, 144,
  disciplinary, 113, 223 n.20                  147
  human, 113–115, 223 n.20, 224           Belief
     n.24                                   degrees of, 133–135, 139–148, 152,
  ‘‘machinic,’’ 113–114, 223 n.21              161, 164–172
Analogy, 40, 43, 46, 50–51, 53–54,          factual, 65–69, 71, 77, 79–80, 100,
     58, 123–124, 207 n.18, 209                127–128
     nn.29–30, 221 n.2, 223 n.17,           propositional, 64, 77–78
     226 n.50, 227 n.57                     representational, 64–67, 71, 74–75,
  formal, 48, 51–52, 208 n.24, 208             77, 79–80, 83, 100, 127–128
     n.26                                 Beth, E. W., 22, 25, 26
  and induction, 131, 134, 137–138        Black, M., 41, 43, 47–48, 108, 155,
  material, 48, 51–52                          205 n.1, 206 n.6, 206 nn.14–16,
  positive, 47–49, 52                          210 n.41
  negative, 47–49, 52, 123, 168           Bloor, D., 222 n.5, 233 n.3
  neutral, 47–49, 51–52, 59–60, 168,      Bogen, J., 69–71, 73–74, 127, 214
     207 n.21                                  n.9



                                      253
Bohr, N., 88–94, 95, 99, 102, 105–         principle of, 86–87, 216 nn.6–7,
     106, 135, 196–198, 208 n.25,             219 n.28
     209 nn.31–32, 212 n.55, 216           true, 87, 218 n.18
     n.3, 216 nn.8–9, 217 nn.11–17,      Correspondence principle
     218 n.18, 221 n.52                    general, 81–83, 104, 106, 116, 122,
Bohr model                                    125, 128, 228 n.15
  of atom, 45–46, 53–54, 62, 72, 83,       quantum, 83, 92, 104
     87–92, 94–95, 99, 102, 135, 212     Correspondence rules, 23–24, 32, 42,
     n.55                                     44, 133, 207 n.20, 206 n.8, 206
  of nucleus, 50–51                           n.10
Bootstrap theory of conﬁrmation, 151–
     153, 228 n.12, 228 n.14             da Costa, N. C. A., 11–13, 17, 25, 27,
Bourbaki, N., 26, 27, 36, 38–39, 205          37–38, 55, 67, 80–82, 85–87,
     n.24                                     97, 100, 132–135, 138–139,
Brown, B., 84, 87–91, 94, 96, 98, 101,        145, 155, 161, 192, 197–198,
     105, 217 n.16, 218 n.17, 219             202 n.4, 202 n.10, 205 n.18,
     n.29, 220 n.46, 221 n.51                 210 n.37, 216 nn.5–6, 219 n.33,
Bueno, O., 72–74, 85, 100, 160,               225 n.40, 233 nn.2–3
     191–194, 202 n.10, 204 n.17,        Data, 17, 25, 59, 68–74, 76, 80, 102,
     205 n.18, 205 n.23, 212 n.51,            126–127, 130, 143, 176, 187,
     214 n.16, 216 n.5, 229 n.4, 231          193, 214 n.8, 222 n.16, 223
     n.31, 232 n.34, 232 n.41, 233            n.18
     n.3                                   and phenomena, 69–74
Bunge, M., 60, 206 n.14, 208 n.24,         theory-ladenness of, 68–70
     209 n.26, 209 n.29, 209 n.33,       Dewey, J., 12, 177, 179, 181, 230
     212 n.54, 213 n.57                       nn.19–20
                                         Discovery, 44, 60–62, 115–116
Caloric, 166–167                           justiﬁcation distinction, 60–61, 83,
Campbell, N., 44, 207 n.20                    85, 103, 105, 107, 116, 122,
Carnap, R., 26, 36, 42–44, 47, 130–           166, 168–169, 226 n.47
     131, 139–140, 202 n.5, 206 n.7,     Doria, F., 25–26, 86
     206 n.9, 221 n.1, 221 n.4, 231      Doubt, 180–183
     n.26, 231 n.31                      Downes, S., 45, 210 n.41, 211 n.46,
Cartwright, N., 40, 54, 56, 59, 71–72,        214 n.6
     75, 78, 108, 210 n.36, 212
     nn.50–51, 214 nn.12–13, 215         Einstein, A., 96, 105, 167, 169–171,
     n.22, 222 n.10, 230 n.14                  216 n.14, 220 n.42
Category theory, 26.                     Ellis, B., 185–186, 190–191, 211 n.48
Chemistry. See Quantum chemistry         Empirical adequacy, 17, 32, 59, 62–
Classical mechanics, 22–23, 25, 60,            63, 68, 74, 176–177, 192–193,
     62, 81–83, 88–91, 135, 148–               204 n.14, 204 n.17, 205 n.19
     150, 161, 187, 202 n.4, 204         Empiricism
     n.18, 232 n.33, 217 n.16               constructive, 59, 61–63, 73–74,
Closure                                        160, 165, 188, 192–193, 231
  deductive, 85, 90, 96, 98, 103–104,          n.27, 232 n.41
     218 n.23, 219 n.27                     structural, 160, 192–194, 229 n.4
  paraconsistent, 88, 90, 98, 100–101,   Epistemic dependence, 74–77
     106, 219 n.29                       Ether, 167–171
Colour. See Quantum chromodynamics       Exclusion principle, 149–150, 152
Commitment. See Acceptance               Exemplar, 57–58, 79, 108, 122, 124–
Contradiction. See Inconsistency               129, 221 n.2, 222 n.4



254   Index
Explanation, 44, 63, 70, 75, 91, 95–          51–53, 56, 74, 139–140, 206
     96, 109–110, 114, 152, 172–173,          n.17, 207 n.20, 222 n.6
     175–178, 212 n.56, 214 nn.13–        Hettema, H., 217 n.16, 220 n.49, 221
     14, 222 n.12, 230 nn.16–17               n.52
  of truth, 9, 201 n.1                    Heuristics, 41, 44, 46, 53, 57, 63, 72,
                                              74, 76, 82–83, 85, 95, 104–105,
Familiarity, 43–44, 117–120                   107–108, 115–116, 120, 122,
Fine, A., 164, 173–175, 215 n.23,             124–125, 128–129, 141, 154,
     230 n.16                                 168–169, 221 n.53, 223 n.18,
French, S., 55, 67, 72–73, 80, 82, 85,        225 n.41, 226 nn.53–54
     87, 97, 100, 117, 123, 132, 145,       and fertility/fruitfulness, 51, 54, 56,
     148, 150, 155, 180, 188–189,             65, 101, 103–106, 143–144, 148,
     192, 197–198, 202 n.10, 205              166, 195, 202 n.2, 212 n.54, 220
     n.23, 208 n.23, 210 nn.36–37,            n.42
     212 n.51, 219 n.33, 225 n.40,        Horton, R., 198
     225 n.42, 228 n.13, 232 n.39,        Horwich, P., 62–63, 143, 151, 164–
     233 n.3, 233 n.41                        165, 228 n.14, 229 nn.5–6
Friedman, M., 26, 30–31, 187              Hughes, R. I. G., 195–197
Fuller, S., 215 n.19, 222 n.8             Hypothetico-deductive method, 133–
                                              136
Garber, D., 137, 143–145, 147, 152,
      228 n.14                            Idealization, 102, 122, 148–151, 153,
Gauge invariance, 118, 123, 125, 225           162–163, 219 n.34
      nn.36–37, 226 n.54                  Inconsistency, 54, 84–106, 197–199,
Giere, R., 31, 49, 57, 78, 82, 118–120,        210 n.40, 216–221, 233 n.3
      161, 197, 215 n.22, 225 n.39,       Induction
      229 n.2                               and analogy, 137–138
Gillies, D., 139, 141–142, 147              forms of, 131–132
Glymour, C., 144, 151–152                   justiﬁcation of, 153, 155–159
Gotesky, R., 216 n.2, 216 n.7, 218          logic of, 130–131, 135–136
      n.25, 219 n.35                        problem of, 153–155
Grandy, R., 35, 214 n.5                     Russell on, 154–155
Greenberg, O. W., 117–118, 225              and support, 146–148
      nn.34–35                            Inference to the best explanation, 172–
Griesemer, J. R., 57, 79                       179
Group theory, 114, 118, 120–121,          Instrumentalism, 32, 98, 104, 164–
      123, 125, 209 n.27, 210 n.39,            165, 175–176, 219 n.29, 229
      225 n.34, 226 n.52, 227 n.55             n.5, 230 n.6, 231 n.31

Hacking, I., 71, 141, 171, 176–179,       James, W., 12, 14–15, 17, 111–112,
    220 n.44, 222 n.10, 229 n.2                181–182, 201 n.6, 202 nn.7–8,
Hardwig, J., 76, 80, 215 n.19                  225 n.43, 230 n.19
Harman, G., 96–98, 101, 218 nn.26–        Jaskowski, S., 86, 100, 202 n.10
    28                                    Justiﬁcation, 61, 83, 85, 103, 105,
Hartmann, S., 41, 55–56, 212 n.53,             107, 115, 120, 122, 130, 166,
    212 n.55                                   168, 226 n.47
Hartree, D. R., 148–150
Hawking, S., 74–75                        Kaiser, M., 69, 72, 214 nn.11–12
Heisenberg, W., 91–93, 218 n.19           Koopman, B. O., 133, 138
Hellman, G., 203 n.6, 204 n.12            Kuhn, T. S., 23, 57, 64, 108, 122,
Hesse, M., 40–41, 43–44, 47–48,               124–128, 198, 221 nn.1–4, 222



                                                                     Index 255
Kuhn, T. S., (cont.)                       Bohr. See Bohr model
    n.5, 22 n.9, 224 n.25, 226 n.48,       contextualist account of, 44
    226 n.51, 227 nn.59–60                 data, 68–74
Kyburg, H., 95, 97, 219 n.27               developmental, 210 n.38
                                           diachronic, 56
Ladyman, J., 72–73, 82, 123, 148,          exemplars. See Exemplar
     150, 160, 187–189, 205 n.23,          iconic, 40, 43, 47, 50, 205 n.1, 207
     210 n.36, 212 n.51, 229 n.7, 232         n.20
     n.37, 232 n.39                        imaginary, 45–46, 206 n.12
Lakatos, I., 83–84, 106, 217 n.16, 221     impoverished, 50, 52
     n.52                                  liquid drop, 50–51, 55–57
Latour, B., 109, 113, 223 n.21             mathematical, 41, 54
Laudan L, 62, 115, 160, 164–165, 167,      material, 57–58
     168, 189–191, 213 n.2, 220 n.49       Maxwell’s, 46, 48
Laws, 22, 46, 57–58, 139–140, 160,         mediating, 54, 209 n.35
     162, 166, 170, 181, 203 n.9, 207      modellist view of, 44–45, 48
     n.18, 209 n.30, 220 n.44, 221         nuclear, 40, 50–51, 55–57
     n.53, 225 n.42                        partial, 48–52, 207 n.19
Laymon, R., 82, 84–85, 101–102, 203        phenomenological, 210 n.36, 212
     n.8, 219 n.34                            n.51
Leplin, J., 189–191                        remnant, 57–58, 210 n.41
Lipton, P., 183–184                        representational, 55, 210 n.41
Logic                                      scale, 45, 210 n.41
  classical, 11, 16, 24–25, 29, 39, 84–    shell, 56
     85, 87–88, 95, 100, 130 198, 202      theoretical, 41, 45, 47–48, 51, 206
     n.5, 202 n.10, 203 n.7, 204 n.12,        n.17, 212 n.51
     204 n.15, 218 n.19, 233 n.3          Model theoretic approach, 22–23, 25–
  discussive, 86, 100                         35, 40–41, 48, 52–58, 60, 68–
  doxastic, 99, 101                           72, 85, 101, 105, 108, 122, 126,
  inductive. See Induction                    151–152, 176, 187–188, 192,
  Jaskowski, 86, 100                          196–197, 202 n.2, 204 n.14,
  non-adjunctive, 87–91, 95–96, 216           207 n.20, 209 n.34, 210 nn.36–
     n.10, 220 n.46                           37, 211 n.47, 215 n.21, 214 n.6,
  paraconsistent, 85–88, 90, 96–100,          221 n.2, 222 n.4, 225 n.45, 233
     106, 202 n.10, 204 n.7                   n.2
Logical omniscience, 97–98, 143–146       Model theory, 10, 16, 21–22, 27–29,
Lukasiewicz, J., 86                           33, 40–41, 205 n.2
Lukes, S., 198                            Morgan, M., 41, 54–56, 72, 75, 210
Lynch, M., 109–110, 222 n.5, 222 n.12         n.37
                                          Morrison, M., 41, 54–56, 72, 75, 210
Maher, P., 80                                 n.37, 216 n.8
Masterman, M., 221 n.2
Maxwell, J. C., 48, 135                   Nagel, E., 41–43, 139, 206 n.10, 207
McMullin, E., 56, 224 n.27                    n.20
Mikenberg, I., 11–13, 17, 81, 161         Nersessian, N., 210 n.43, 213 n.57,
Miller, D., 146–148, 171, 190                 224 n.25, 226 n.47, 226 nn.49–
Models                                        50, 227 n.57
  and analogy. See Analogy                Norton, J., 84–85, 90, 94–98, 218
  analogue, 41, 50–52, 210 n.41               nn.21–22, 220 n.45, 229
  autonomous, 54–57, 210 n.37                 n.11
  billiard-ball, 40, 43–44, 50            No miracles argument, 172–173



256   Index
Observation, 18, 23, 63, 66, 68–70,        Popper, K. R., 85, 139, 146–148, 171,
    100, 110, 134, 143, 145, 151,                173, 216 n.4, 219 n.39
    162, 189, 191, 204 n.14, 206           Popper-Miller argument, 146–148, 171
    n.10, 231 n.27                         Post, H. R., 61, 81–83, 103–105, 107,
Observational terms, 12, 24, 42, 160,            115–116, 120–121, 128, 141,
    173, 232 n.32                                218 n.21, 220 n.47, 221 n.53,
de Oliveira, M. B., 82, 153                      223 n.18, 225 n.37, 225 n.44,
                                                 231 n.29, 232 nn.33–34
Paraconsistent logic. See Logic, para-     Priest, G., 84, 87, 89, 96. 104, 218
     consistent                                  n.18, 219 n.32, 220 n.43
Paraparticles, 116–118                     Probability
Partial interpretation, 23, 42, 44–45,       frequency, 134
     52                                      logical, 134, 139, 227 n.3
Partial isomorphism, 48–52, 51, 56–          pragmatic, 133–136, 139, 141,
     59, 73, 75, 102, 107, 123–125,              143–148, 150, 153–154
     130, 143, 150, 152, 161, 187,           prior, 135, 136, 138–142, 152, 154
     192–193, 195–197, 207 n.22,             posterior, 136, 141–142, 153
     208 n.24, 211 n.46                      subjective, 133–135, 138, 142, 145,
Partial relations, 18–19, 28, 52, 59,            148, 150–153, 157–158, 227 n.2
     67, 73, 145, 191, 202 n.19            Psillos, S., 44–45, 160–161, 166–169,
Partial structures, 12, 16–20, 28–29,            173–176, 185, 187–188, 206
     35–36, 38, 41, 48–54, 56, 59–               nn.11–12, 207 n.17, 207 n.21,
     60, 66–67, 72–73, 77–79, 85,                212 n.50, 212 n.56, 229 n.3, 229
     101–102, 105, 120–122, 130,                 nn.8–9, 230 nn.15–16, 231 n.26,
     143, 145, 150, 152–153, 160–                231 n.31
     162, 168, 186–199, 208 n.22,          Pursuit, 61–62, 115–116, 118, 121–
     210 n.36, 210 n.38, 211 n.47                122, 125–126, 154, 229 n.9
Peirce, C. S., 12–13, 111, 177, 180–       Putnam, H., 23, 139, 160, 173, 202
     181, 205 n.1, 229 n.12, 230                 n.7, 230 n.18
     n.22, 231 nn.24–25
Perry, J., 77–78                           Quantum chemistry, 55, 148–150,
Pessimistic meta-induction, 164–168,           152
     170                                   Quantum chromodynamics, 55, 116–
Phenomena, 32, 42, 44, 54–55, 59,              118, 123–125, 210 n.39
     63, 68–74, 81, 86, 101, 111,          Quantum electrodynamics, 118, 123–
     144, 162, 193, 203 n.9, 207               125, 186
     n.20, 211 n.46, 212 n.56, 214         Quantum ﬁeld theory, 62, 83, 118,
     nn.12–15, 220 n.44, 221 n.4,              125, 170, 186, 209 n.27
     225 n.45, 229 n.1                     Quantum mechanics, 24–25, 44–45,
  and entity realism, 177–178                  54, 56, 84, 87–96, 105, 148–
  and Inference to the best explanation,       150, 188, 196–197, 204 n.15,
     172–173, 175–176                          205 n.2, 208 n.25, 210 n.36, 214
Pickering, A., 108–115, 117, 120–121,          n.8, 217 nn.17–17, 218 n.18,
     123–124, 222 n.7, 222 nn.10–11,           218 n.20, 220 n.49, 221 n.51,
     222 nn.14–16, 223 n.17, 223               231 n.31, 232 n.38
     nn.19–20, 223 nn.22–23, 224           Quarks, 116–117, 120–121, 123
     n.24, 224 n.26, 224 n.28, 224
     nn.32–33, 225 n.35, 225 n.38          Rationality, 64–66, 68, 76–77, 103–
Planck, M., 88–90, 96, 217 n.17                 106, 120, 133, 135, 137, 142,
Poincaré, H., 188, 218 n.25, 224 n.30,         154–155, 158, 198–199, 215 n.19,
     232 n.35                                   218 n.23, 225 n.43, 233 n.3



                                                                    Index 257
Realism, 45, 48, 58–59, 61, 71, 160–     Salmon, W., 131, 136, 227 nn.5–6,
     192, 229 n.4, 230 n.16, 230              228 n.7
     n.18, 231 n.23, 232 nn.37–38        Satisfaction, 10, 29, 31, 60, 201 n.1,
  convergent, 74                              208 n. 22, 211 n.46, 212 n.54
  constructive, 229 n.2                  Schotch, P. K., 89, 216 n.10
  entity, 177–179, 229 n.2               Semantic approach. See Model theoretic
  patchwork, 212 n.50                         approach
  pragmatic, 111–112, 183–186, 231       Set-theory, 10, 18–19, 21–28, 30–31,
     n.27                                     34, 36–39, 41, 48, 203 n.6, 203
  quasi-, 225 n.45                            nn.8–9, 204 n.11, 204 n.15, 205
  standard, 160–162, 166–172                  n.25, 207 n.22, 208 n.24, 208
  structural, 130, 186–189, 211               n.26, 209 n.28, 212 n.52, 212
     n.48, 231 nn.28–29, 231 n.31,            n.54
     232 n.32, 232 nn.34–35, 232         Set theoretical predicates, 22, 25, 27–
     n.39                                     28, 30, 38, 204 n.11
Received view                            Shapere, D., 70, 72, 162–163, 202
  of models, 42–46, 52, 54                    n.9, 215 n.18
  of theories, 23–24, 32, 41–43, 53–     Shimony, A., 138, 140–141, 153, 227
     54, 58, 68–69, 103, 108, 187,            nn.5–6, 228 n.7
     195, 206 n.17, 207 n.20             Similarity, 43, 46, 49–50, 52–54, 118,
  and theorita, 45                            123–124, 126–128, 161, 196,
Redhead, M., 41, 50–52, 54, 56–59,            207 n.21, 208 n.25, 209 nn.29–
     75, 120, 146–147, 202 n.3, 225           30, 226 n.51, 227 n. 59
     n.41–42, 226 n.54, 228 n.9          Sklar, L., 23–24, 161
Reference, 160, 162, 167–171, 186,       Smith, J., 83, 94, 95–98, 101, 103–
     188                                      105, 218 n.23, 218 n.25, 219
Reichenbach, H., 103, 116, 219 n.40           nn.27–28, 220 n.45, 220 n.48
Relativism, 64–66, 108, 198–199,         Smith, J. E., 13–14, 177, 181–182,
     231 n.27                                 202 n.8, 230 n.20, 231 n.24
Renormalization, 123, 209 n.27, 226      Social interests, 103, 107–111, 116,
     n.53                                     120, 128, 222 n.11, 223 n.23
Representations                          Sociology of science, 103, 107–110,
  artistic, 196–197                           120, 128, 222 n.11, 223 n.21,
  partial, 13, 17, 19, 53, 60, 67, 77–        231 n.23
     78, 102, 197, 206 n.14, 213 n.57    Sperber, D., 64, 67–68, 74–76, 79,
  propositional, 16–17, 65–66, 71, 77         127, 219 nn.37–38
  scientiﬁc, 35, 55, 84, 110–111, 179,   Stalnaker, R. C., 79, 215 n.21, 221
     196–197, 207 n.21, 210 n.42,             n.50
     211 n.45, 226 n.49                  Stegmüller, W., 32
  semi-propositional, 65–68, 71, 74–     Structures. See Partial structures
     76, 79–80, 83, 100, 106, 115,       Structural empiricism. See Empiricism,
     127–128, 198–199, 219 n.38               structural
  of theories, 25, 30–31, 33–34, 151,    Structuralism, 32, 204 n.18, 205
     231 n.31                                 n.19, 221 n.2, 231 n.28
Rescher, N., 84–85, 181, 216 n.3, 219    Structural realism. See Realism, structural
     n.32                                Suarez, M., 40, 54, 72, 78, 196, 214
Resemblance, 15, 108, 125–126, 128,           nn.12–13
     196                                 Suppe, F., 22–25, 40, 42–44, 58–59,
Resistance, 109, 111–115, 117, 124,           73, 108, 122, 202 n.2, 204 n.18,
     222 n.15, 223 n.19, 227 n.56             205 n.1, 207 n.20, 225 n.45, 226
Russell, B., 36, 147, 154–155, 157–158        n.48



258   Index
Suppes, P., 21–30, 33, 40–41, 58, 68,        181–183, 189, 198–199, 201
    70–71, 76, 201 n.3, 204 n.11,            n.1, 202 nn.7–8
    204 n.14, 204 n.18, 205 n.2, 206       partial/pragmatic/quasi-, 11–20,
    n.3, 209 n.30, 212 n.52, 213             33–36, 59–60, 62, 64, 67–68,
    n.56, 213 n.3, 227 n.55                  73–74, 79–80, 83, 85, 95, 97,
Symmetry, 113, 116–117, 120, 122–            101, 106, 130–148, 152–154,
    124, 128, 149, 162, 171, 218             161, 163–164, 171–172, 192–
    n.21, 225 nn. 41–43, 226 n.52            193, 196, 198–199, 202 n.8,
                                             202 n.10, 204 n.17, 225 n.42,
Tarski, A., 8–12, 15–17, 21–22, 29,          227 n.2, 228 nn.7–8, 232
     35, 41, 161, 202 nn.1–3, 202            n.41
     n.1, 202 n.1, 202 n.5, 205 n.18,
     211 n.46                            Ullian, J. S., 100
Theoretical terms, 23–24, 42, 44, 139,   Underconsideration, argument from,
     160, 162–165, 180, 188, 232              189–192
     n.32                                Underdetermination, 62, 180, 184,
  idle, 166–167                               188–192, 211 n.49, 218 n.22,
  working, 166–167                            230 n.16
Theories                                 Uniﬁcation, 233 n.2
  individuation, 122, 226 n.48
  intrinsic/extrinsic view of, 29, 33–   van Fraassen, B., 17, 22, 24–25, 30–
     35, 59–60, 62, 105, 134–135,             33, 59, 62, 68–69, 73, 130–131,
     140, 150, 152, 198, 232 n.41             151, 160, 165, 173, 175–176,
  model theoretic view of. See Model          178, 183, 188, 196, 204 nn.12–
     Theoretic Approach                       14, 205 n.21, 211 n.47, 212
  Received view of. See Received view         n.50, 213 n.2, 214 n.8, 214 n.16,
Thompson, P., 102, 195                        215 n.25, 222 n.8, 225 n.41, 225
Truth                                         n.43, 226 n.46, 229 n.4, 231
  approximate, 11, 60, 62, 102–103,           nn.27–28
     160–161, 166, 172–175, 184–         Veriﬁability, 14–15
     185, 187, 203 n.9, 228 n.1, 229
     n.3                                 Wittgenstein, L., 125, 222 n.5, 222
  classical, 8–11, 15                        n.12
  and Convention T, 10                   Wojcicki, R., 203 n.9
  correspondence, 8–17, 19–21, 35,       Woodward, J., 69–74, 127, 214 n.9
     59–60, 62, 64, 66–67, 73–74,        Worrall, J., 30, 176–177, 186–188,
     87, 95, 98, 100–102, 105, 119,          229 n.1, 230 n.17, 232 n.32
     132, 134, 148, 161, 174, 176,       Wylie, A., 175, 179




                                                                  Index 259
