The Logical Foundations of
Scientiﬁc Theories


Science is not just a collection of laws, a catalogue of unrelated facts. It is a
creation of human mind, with its freely invented ideas and concepts. Phys-
ical theories try to form a picture of reality and to establish its connection
with the wide world of sense impressions. Thus the only justification for
our mental structures is whether and in what way our theories form such
a link.
                                                    —A. Einstein & L. Infeld
No, no, you’re not thinking; you’re just being logical.
                                                   —N. Bohr (to Einstein)

This book addresses the logical aspects of the foundations of scientific theo-
ries. Even though the relevance of formal methods in the study of scientific
theories is now widely recognized and regaining prominence, the issues
covered here are still not generally discussed in the philosophy of science.
The authors focus mainly on the role played by the underlying formal appa-
ratuses employed in the construction of the models of scientific theories by
relating the discussion with the so-called semantic approach to scientific the-
ories. The book describes the role played by this metamathematical frame-
work in three main aspects: considerations of formal languages employed
to axiomatize scientific theories, the role of the axiomatic method itself,
and the way set-theoretical structures, which play the role of the models of
theories, are developed. The authors also discuss the differences and
philosophical relevance of the two basic ways of axiomatizing a scientific
theory — namely, Patrick Suppes’s set-theoretical predicates and the “da
Costa and Chuaqui” approach. This book engages with important discus-
sions of the nature of scientific theories and will be a useful resource for
researchers and upper-level students working in the philosophy of science.
Décio Krause is Professor of Logic and Philosophy of Science in the Depart-
ment of Philosophy of the Federal University of Santa Catarina, Brazil. His
works deal with the logical foundations of science, mainly involving the
logical and metaphysical discussions about identity and individuality of
quantum entities and the applications of non-classical logics to sciences.

Jonas R. B. Arenhart is Associate Professor at the Department of Philoso-
phy of the Federal University of Santa Catarina, Brazil. His main research
interests are logic and philosophy of logic, philosophy of science, the meta-
physics of science, and foundations of science.
Routledge Studies in Philosophy of Mathematics and Physics

Edited by Elaine Landry, University of California, Davis, USA and
Dean Rickles, University of Sydney, Australia




 1 The Logical Foundation of
   Scientiﬁc Theories
   Languages, Structures, and
   Models
   Décio Krause and
   Jonas R. B. Arenhart
The Logical Foundations of
Scientiﬁc Theories
Languages, Structures, and Models


Décio Krause and
Jonas R. B. Arenhart
First published 2017
by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
and by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2017 Décio Krause and Jonas R. B. Arenhart
The right of the editors to be identiﬁed as the author of the editorial material, and of the
authors for their individual chapters, has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and
78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any
form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented,
including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system,
without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered
trademarks, and are used only for identiﬁcation and explanation without intent to
infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Names: Krause, Decio. | Becker Arenhart, Jonas R.
Title: The logical foundations of scientiﬁc theories : languages, structures,
    and models / by Dâecio Krause and Jonas R.B. Arenhart.
Description: New York : Routledge, 2017. | Series: Routledge studies in the
    philosophy of mathematics and physics ; 1 | Includes bibliographical
    references and index.
Identiﬁers: LCCN 2016006566 | ISBN 9781138684492 (hardback : alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Science—Theory reduction. | Science—Philosophy. | Logic,
    Symbolic and mathematical. | Science—Methodology.
Classiﬁcation: LCC Q175 .K87194 2017 | DDC 501—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016006566
ISBN: 978-1-138-68449-2 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-53521-0 (ebk)
Typeset in Sabon
by Apex CoVantage, LLC
To my girls Mercedes, Heloísa, and Olívia (DK)
To mom, Dai, and Carol (JRBA)
This page intentionally left blank
Contents




    Figures                                                        ix
    Preface                                                        xi
    Acknowledgments                                               xvii

1   The Quandary on the Characterization of Scientific Theories     1
    1.1 The Received View and Syntactical Approaches                3
    1.2 The Semantic Approach                                      10
    1.3 Scientific Theories and Philosophical Tools                18

2   Axiomatization                                                 21
    2.1 Concrete Axiomatics                                        25
    2.2 Abstract Axiomatics                                        30
    2.3 Formal Axiomatics                                          34
        2.3.1 First-Order Classical Logic With Identity            34
        2.3.2 Peano Arithmetics                                    38

3   A Mathematical Background                                      42
    3.1 The Principle of Constructivity                            42
    3.2 The ZF(C) Set Theories                                     45
        3.2.1 The Postulates of ZF(C)                              48
        3.2.2 A Matter of Terminology                              51
        3.2.3 Inaccessible Cardinals                               52
        3.2.4 Informal Semantics of L2                             52
    3.3 ‘Models’ of ZF(C), Again                                   53
    3.4 Urelemente                                                 56
        3.4.1 Some Comments                                        58
    3.5 More on the ‘Models’ of ZF(C)                              58

4   Criticism of the Axiomatic Method and Its Defense              62
    4.1 Does the AM Encompass Heuristics?                          62
          4.1.1 The Axiomatic Method and Heuristics                63
    4.2 Truesdell Against the ‘Suppesians’                         64
viii Contents
    4.3   Arnol’d and the Bourbaki Program                     68
    4.4   Worth Axiomatize?                                    68
    4.5   Does Axiomatization Really Axiomatize?               71

5   Axiomatization and Scientific Theories                     76
    5.1 External Axiomatizations                               77
    5.2 Structures                                             79
    5.3 Languages and Algebras                                 83
    5.4 Languages for Speaking of Structures                   86
        5.4.1 The Language of a Structure                      88
    5.5 Definability and Expressive Elements                   89
    5.6 On the New Symbols                                     92
    5.7 Da Costa and Chuaqui—Suppes Predicates                 94
        5.7.1 A Suppes Predicate for Group Theory              95
        5.7.2 A Suppes Predicate for Classical Particle
                Mechanics                                      96
    5.8 The Approach of Suppes                                 99
        5.8.1 An Axiomatization of Non-relativistic Quantum
                Mechanics                                     104

6   Models and Scientific Theories                            112
    6.1 Again on the Order of Languages and Structures        112
    6.2 Further Remarks on the Suppes Approach                114
    6.3 Da Costa and Chuaqui, Further Remarks                 117
    6.4 The Metamathematical Framework                        119

    Bibliography                                              127
    Index                                                     135
Figures




3.1   The well-founded ‘model’ of pure ZF(C)                    55
3.2 The universe of sets with Urelemente. On is the class of
    ordinals, and U is the set of atoms (Urelemente)            57
5.1 The well-founded ‘model’ V=hV, 2i of ZFC, a structure A
    built within ZFC, and the scale ε(D) based on the domain
    D. For details, see the text                                80
5.2   Free algebras: φ  σ = α; that is, the diagram commutes   85
This page intentionally left blank
Preface




It is often said that scientific knowledge is, largely, conceptual knowledge.
We approach knowledge (in science) with the help of concepts we elaborate
on in order to study a certain domain we are interested in. But we would
like to say that scientific knowledge involves a little bit more: we approach
knowledge through structured concepts. Structures are what we use to ap-
proach scientific knowledge. It is with the help of structures that we orga-
nize the concepts we use in our scientific activity. With structures, the
scientist may have a list of domains of objects she is interested in, a list
of relations, operations, and distinguished elements that are relevant for
her approach; the interrelations between the distinct concepts become ex-
plicit. So a structured account of scientific knowledge seems to capture
much of what is generally said about scientific knowledge being conceptual.
    We remark that the notion of structure we are using here is very general.
Even in psychoanalysis, the specialist uses structures of a kind, say, when
she organizes her knowledge with concepts such as (for a Lacanian) the un-
conscious, repetition, transference, and drive. In this book, we shall be con-
cerned with mathematical structures — that is, those involving concepts of
mathematized sciences, mainly physical sciences. We hope that our investi-
gation will throw some light on the nature of scientific theories, mainly on
the relation between structures and the linguistic apparatuses employed to
describe such structures.
    In more precise terms, what is a structure in the sense that we use this
term here, and how does it enter into the discussion and into the elabora-
tion of a scientific theory? We shall give precise definitions of these ideas
and, more importantly, we shall pay attention to the mathematical frame-
work where the notion of structure is constructed. It is important to notice
that in the literature there are several approaches to structures, ranging
from their mathematical definitions (Bourbaki) to their use in mathematics
(Bourbaki, again) and in more general scientific contexts (Carnap, Suppes).
But no discussion was provided until now on the kind of mathematical ap-
paratuses a structure depends on and how it influences the idea of
a scientific theory that depends on such structures. If a structure is, as
we usually learn in our first-order logic courses, a tuple of the form
xii   Preface
A = hD, {ai}, {Rj}, {fk}i, with i, j, and k ranging over certain sets of indices,
then we need to use set theory. But which set theory? We rarely discuss
questions like this and others related to them: Can the domain D really
be considered a set (a collection of distinct elements)?1 And what about
the individual constants ai? Do they really name some of the individuals
of D? Are all of them nameable? What about the relations Rj? Are they
just relations relating elements of the domain? But what if the structure is
a topological space, a well-ordered set, or something else, as almost all
structures that model scientific theories are, which are not first-order struc-
tures like the one exemplified earlier? Even if we say that we are reasoning
within a specific set theory, what about the structures that model the set
theory itself? Well, one could say we can always appeal to informal set
theory, where (almost) everything can be done. This is true, mainly
because informal set theory is inconsistent.2 So should we regard our best
scientific theories to be grounded on an inconsistent mathematical basis?
From the point of view of the logical foundations of science, this sounds un-
desirable. As philosophers, we should look for suitable frameworks for
grounding our best theories. Except, of course, if the theory is to be incon-
sistent. But in this case, we need to change logic accordingly.
    In addition, we may ask why use set theory and not higher-order logics or
category theory? Are these alternatives not good enough to provide a better
ground to act as pillars of scientific theories? Of course this also needs to be
answered. This book will not address these questions in detail. We simply
assume the standard framework most philosophers of science usually
make use of when they say something about the subject — namely, set
theory. In fact, the semantic approach to scientific theories, a paradigm
we are still living in, considers scientific theories in terms of their models,
which, pushing the issue a little, are set-theoretical entities. But the seman-
ticists (van Fraassen, Giere, Suppes, and many others) do not speak about
the set theory they are working in. Suppes explicitly regards the metamath-
ematical framework as being informal (not axiomatized) set theory, as is
well known, but if asked to be more precise (as one of us has required
him to be), he would say (as he did) “choose one you find suitable for ex-
pressing the mathematical concepts you will be in need of” (this informal
conversation took place in Florianópolis in 2002). Okay, we could be
happy with this answer, but we are not. Ever since the 1990s, one of us,
and now both of us, has investigated standard set theories on what
regards the notion of an individual. Since there is a reasonable interpreta-
tion of quantum objects in terms of non-individuals (see [FreKra.06]), we
think that the best way to express quantum semantics is not in terms of
sets, but by using collections that may comprise indiscernible elements
called quasi-sets. The theory of these entities is not the subject of this
book, but has motivated us to look to the ‘standard’ set theories used in
science. Indeed, physics uses concepts such as vectors, matrices, derivatives,
differential equations, tensors, topological spaces, and so on — all of them
                                                                Preface   xiii
described in terms of sets. Thus, as part of a major project, we have made
the present study we now offer to the general reader interested in the phil-
osophical and logical foundations of science, mainly of physical theories.
    We owe much to the approach of Bourbaki’s notion of species of struc-
tures, mainly in the formulation given by Newton da Costa. In due time, we
shall make all the relevant references. We had planned to write a book dis-
cussing the nature of the metamathematical framework that underlies the
most relevant physical theories, but the project became so wide that we
needed to shorten it and keep with a more limited goal. This general plan
was not put aside. Thus this book may be seen as a first contribution to
the analysis of the underlying mathematics of scientific theories. Indeed,
it would require a careful analysis of all physical concepts to see which
kind of mathematics they seem to demand; for instance, it is usually said
in informal conversations that the denumerable version of the Axiom of
Choice is enough for physics, but as far as we know, no proof of this
fact has been provided, and perhaps it cannot be done since we don’t
know the physics that will be developed in near future. The study could,
of course, be restricted to known physical theories. But this is not what
we intend to do here, for we are not concerned with the history of
science. Our aim is to offer to the reader an overview of the notion of math-
ematical structure that underlies the usual physical theories. Thus this book
is organized as follows.
    The first chapter rehearses most of the classical opposition between the
so-called syntactical and semantic approaches to scientific theories. We
briefly characterize the two approaches and their main features, pressing
on the alleged virtues of the semantic approach over the deficiencies of
the syntactic approach. As it is widely known, and we discuss in the
chapter, language is one of the central points of concern: the syntactic ap-
proach is said to fail due to its heavy reliance on language, while the seman-
tic approach succeeds because it may characterize theories as language-free.
We present how the current debate has shifted from such a concern over
language and how both approaches may be seen as somehow complemen-
tary. In particular, we advance the thesis present throughout the book that
the characterization of theories most appropriate depends on our purposes.
That is, how we present a theory depends on what we need. In most cases,
both a linguistic approach and the use of models are helpful for distinct pur-
poses and both are needed for metamathematical studies of scientific
theories.
    With the main objection that the use of a specific language may cause
trouble in the characterization of a scientific theory, in chapter 2, we
discuss our first tool: the axiomatic method. In fact, a theory may be char-
acterized by the linguistic formulation of its axioms or else by a class of
models, models of the axioms. So axioms are the first fundamental tool
for the relevant study of foundations. We keep the chapter self-contained
by briefly presenting the history of the method and its evolution. In the
xiv Preface
last case, the evolution comes in two senses: in one direction there is a
growing abstraction in the method from the nineteenth century. In
another sense, there is, also from the nineteenth century on, the recognition
that this is a useful tool for conceptual clarification for empirical sciences
such as physics (obviously, the method was a model and an ideal for philos-
ophers ever since its inception in the antiquities).
    We continue our investigation on the axiomatic method in chapter 3. We
exemplify the use of the axiomatic method to describe the theory that will
serve as a mathematical basis for our discussion of structures and also will
work as a framework inside which axiomatization of most scientific theories
takes place. The theory in question is the famous Zermelo–Fraenkel set
theory. Set theory is the mathematical basis in which models as set-
theoretical structures are developed, so it is useful, to keep the book self-
contained, to have a good look at how it is developed. Also, it is a case of
a formal theory, so it continues the discussion given in chapter 2. Given
that set theory is a sui generis theory, due to the fact that its models
cannot be developed inside set theory itself (unless it is a stronger set
theory, as we shall discuss), we also present a brief discussion on the
nature of models of set theory. Models of set theory play a much greater
role in the study of scientific theories than most people think: the nature of
the model of set theory being employed influences the nature of the models
of scientific theories that are being developed inside that set theory. We
discuss such issues in this volume, and even though we cannot develop the
whole point in this book, this is a first approach to the subject.
    In chapter 4, we present some criticisms advanced against the axiomatic
method. We argue for its usefulness in the development of science and try to
show that the main criticisms are not effective. In particular, criticisms are
presented against the Suppesian approach to axiomatization, an approach
we shall present in detail in the next chapter. We argue that the criticism
in this case is, in general, misguided, confusing a general presentation of
the axiomatic method with a particular use made of it; that is, the critics
attack the fact that the method was employed only to deal with classical
particle mechanics and that this restriction renders it useless. However, as
a presentation of a method, it is perfectly legitimate, and extensions may
still be provided for other areas of physics. That is, the method is not re-
strictive and limited because it is being used to deal with a limited field
of physics.
    Chapter 5 addresses the issue of axiomatization of empirical theories. We
are mainly concerned with two approaches to axiomatization: one by da
Costa and Chuaqui and another by Suppes himself. Here our previous dis-
cussion on the use of language and on the nature of models begins to enter
our analysis. As we argue, da Costa and Chuaqui axiomatize a theory by
presenting its postulates in a formal language. The models of the theory
thus framed are in fact models in the style of Tarski. We keep the text
self-contained and present details about the construction of structures and
                                                                    Preface    xv
formal languages. We also present as an example the axiomatization of clas-
sical particle mechanics in the style of da Costa and Chuaqui; this requires
that every mathematical step theory be axiomatized too. In opposition to
that approach, Suppes’s axiomatization in set theory assumes not a specific
formal language for a theory, but rather set theory itself as the language in
which the theory will be axiomatized. This is in straight contrast with the da
Costa–Chuaqui approach. We exemplify how this restriction to the lan-
guage of set theory increases the power of the axiomatization and how it
facilitates axiomatization. Examples are also provided. So while da
Costa–Chuaqui axiomatization is more apt for metamathematical studies,
Suppes’s approach focuses on the easiness of application.
   Finally, in chapter 6, we develop a discussion on the nature of models for
each of the kinds of axiomatization developed in the previous chapters. As
we mentioned, da Costa–Chuaqui axiomatization is a typical logical axi-
omatization, with models playing the role of providing an interpretation
for the axioms. In this sense, a class of models is a class of models in the Tars-
kian sense, with an interpretation of the language of the theory. This provides
for nice opportunities to apply the resources of higher-order model theory to
scientific theories in particular, the theory of definition presented briefly
in chapter 5 may contribute with a possible solution to the problem of equiv-
alence between theories as formulated in chapter 1. We address these issues
in this chapter. Suppes’s approach, on the other hand, is not a legitimate
model approach, as it were. The models for an axiomatic system in
the style of Suppes are not taken in the same sense as Tarski’s models; the
notions of interpretation and truth are absent. We discuss such issues in
this chapter and how one can account for some set-theoretical structures
being the ‘models’ of a theory. We also discuss how the models of the set
theory being employed are relevant to the nature of the models that charac-
terize a theory. Even though our discussions are not fully developed, they set
the stage for further investigations and developments, which we hope to
conduce in our investigations to follow.
   The reader may take this book as a first step, a reopening of the field, an
attempt to bring metamathematical issues back to the study of scientific the-
ories in particular, and philosophy of science in general. We hope this
rather initial and inconclusive investigation will inspire others to follow
along similar lines.
                                             Florianópolis, December of 2015
                                                                     The authors



NOTES

    1. A pioneering questioning in this sense appeared in [DalTor.93]; see also
       [FreKra.06].
    2. Inconsistent in an intuitive sense.
This page intentionally left blank
Acknowledgments




We would like to acknowledge the influence and help of several people.
With the risk of leaving someone out, we would like to thank Newton da
Costa for his influence, Otávio Bueno for constant discussion, Steven
French, and Fernando T. F. Moraes. We must not forget to mention our stu-
dents Conrado Emerick and Lauro de Mattos Nunes Filho, who had the pa-
tience to take our courses on scientific theories while we were still working
on the manuscript. Special thanks to Dean Rickles and Elaine Landry, the
editors of the series Philosophy of Mathematics and Physics for the kind in-
vitation for us to write this book. We also would like to give special thanks
to Sophie Rudland and Chris Mathews for the kind correspondence, for the
attention, and for the guidelines in preparing this manuscript.
This page intentionally left blank
1     The Quandary on the
      Characterization of
      Scientific Theories




It is perhaps a common place to say that the debate on the nature of scien-
tific theories in contemporary philosophy of science has mainly revolved
around the syntax-semantics debate. During the first half of the twentieth
century, when the Logical Empiricist program flourished, a version of the
syntactical approach ruled. During the second half of the twentieth
century, after the development of model theory by Tarski and the decline
of the Vienna Circle, the semantic approach was developed and still
forms the actual paradigm. However, a closer look would reveal that
apart from the story of a heated dispute, there was not really a debate:
after the decline of the Received View—as the approach by the Logical Em-
piricists to scientific theories was called—almost no one else was really pro-
moting that kind of view, so it is strange that philosophers of science
adhering to the semantic approach took as part of their tasks to criticize
what they took to be the syntactic approach.
    F. Suppe’s preface and afterward in [Sup.77] illustrate the situation quite
clearly; Suppe’s volume is a collection of papers presented at Symposium on
the Structure of Scientific Theories held at Illinois in 1969. The call for the
symposium urged participants to promote new views on the structure of
scientific theories, given that the Received View was considered as largely
inadequate (again, see the preface to [Sup.77]). Facing the ruin of the
only unitary framework available for philosophical work on scientific the-
ories, philosophers of science were looking for a substitute. As Suppe
[Sup.77, p.618] has put it, after such a successful debunking of the Received
View,

    the result was widespread confusion and disagreement among philoso-
    phers as to what the main problems in philosophy of science were, how
    they should be approached, and what would constitute acceptable so-
    lutions to them. The 1969 Illinois Symposium on the Structure of Scien-
    tific Theories [. . .] occurred in the midst of this disarray, and thus
    provides a particularly vivid account of a discipline in search of a
    new direction.
2   The Quandary on the Characterization of Scientific Theories
    So, it seems, a framework for scientific theories is required in order for the
main problems in the philosophy of science to be clearly stated and investi-
gated. The Received View furnished such a framework, and in its absence,
no consensus could be achieved about even what were the main problems
in the philosophy of science. A replacement was being sought and was
found in the new semantic approach. The later did not seem to fall prey
to the difficulties that plagued the Received View. However, the dialectics
of the debate seem to put much emphasis on that difference. A cursory
look in the literature will give the reader the impression that there is still
a debate; adherents of the semantic approach still seem to feel the need to
constantly review criticisms of the Received View and promote the
advantages of the semantic approach on the treatment of those difficulties.
    Given that still prevailing agonistic spirit, the central issue concerns
whether scientific theories (specifically, empirical theories) are more prop-
erly characterized as syntactical entities, in terms of formal languages and
sets of axioms and inference rules expressed in such formal language, or
as semantic entities, in terms of classes of models and/or structures (there
is disagreement over whether structures and models are the same kind of
thing and about which is more appropriate for the semantic approach, as
we shall see soon). It is generally agreed that the semanticists have won
the battle, and the semantic approach is now considered the new orthodoxy
[Con.06]. Now, as we have remarked, it should come as no surprise that the
semantic view established itself, given that the syntactic view was seen as
unable to deal with its criticisms even before the semantic approach
clearly emerged. Along with the rise of the new orthodoxy, a less rigorous
and less formal-friendly mood has dominated the philosophical studies of
scientific theories.
    However, apart from how the story is usually told, new studies on the
Received View are emerging, and along with them, a more faithful under-
standing of the characterization of scientific theories by the Logical Empir-
icists is being achieved. With the publication of such works, we start to
understand that the debate is presented in such a way that is not favorable
to the syntactical approach; in fact, the Received View is generally pre-
sented as a caricature of a highly naive and implausible view (see
[Lut.12], [Hal.15], and the references in those works). The syntactic ap-
proach, mainly identified with the approach advanced by some members
of the Vienna Circle such as Carnap and Hempel, was criticized in
almost every aspect. As it was characterized by its opponents, it really
did suffer from profound difficulties as an approach to scientific theories.
Perhaps the heavier criticisms seem to be those accusing it of too radical
deviance of actual scientific practice, mainly due to its heavy reliance on
first-order logic and axiomatization. As an account of scientific theories,
the Received View failed badly by distancing itself from real science and
by relying so heavily on formal tools and techniques (or, at least, so the
argument goes).
          The Quandary on the Characterization of Scientific Theories          3
    The semantic view, on the other hand, seemed to be completely different
from the syntactical view in those aspects, keeping close to actual scientific
practice and not requiring that scientific theories be formulated in any spe-
cific language. In particular, this last feature was erected as a great virtue of
the view and was defended by van Fraassen and his followers (see for in-
stance [vanF.89, pp.221, pp.225–6]). The so-called model revolution initi-
ated by Patrick Suppes in the ’60s would be reduced to nothing if language
were allowed to play a substantial role in the formulation of a theory (the
claim is not from Suppes himself, but see [Sups.60, Sups.67] and [Mul.11,
sec.6]). However, as we shall discuss in what follows, it is perhaps this sole
requirement of being ‘language-free’ that makes the semantic approach
almost senseless, while at the same time it is this requirement that allegedly
marks a radical divide between both approaches nowadays. Leave that re-
quirement out and we have a position that can, perhaps, be made compat-
ible with a syntactical approach too.
    We shall not attempt to present here a revision of the literature about the
whole dispute. However, given that the following chapters will deal with
issues that are related to both the semantic and the syntactic approaches,
and references shall be made to those approaches, we shall give here to
the reader a brief summary of the debate and present reasons for it seem-
ingly going out of the tracks. Our aim is not to promote one of the
approaches as superior, but rather to argue that scientific theories may be
profitably studied by the philosopher and by those interested in foundations
from many distinct points of view. Instead of a competition between dis-
tinct approaches, we propose that they do complement each other. This
kind of claim will involve another revision of the attitude toward the rela-
tion between theories in real scientific practice and our rational reconstruc-
tion of them for philosophical purposes. As we shall argue, our constructs
may employ distinct technical resources, and it is not clear that they should
reproduce in every detail their informal counterparts. Perhaps formalized
theories (be it in a formal language or some set theory) gain a life of their
own, helping us to understand their informal counterparts; that is their
purpose.
    So, for the moment, we shall briefly review the main features of the
Received View (and mention syntactic approaches) and of the semantic
approach. This, we hope, will show how features of both approaches are
employed in the next chapters with the aim of logical analysis of scientific
theories. It should be clear that an emphasis on the identification of theories
with something seems responsible for much of the problems.


1.1   THE RECEIVED VIEW AND SYNTACTICAL APPROACHES

The traditional presentation and criticisms addressed to the syntactic view
of theories should more properly be confined only to what we have called
4   The Quandary on the Characterization of Scientific Theories
the Received View on scientific theories. Recall that the Received View is
the view on scientific theories developed by members of the Vienna
Circle, mainly Carnap and Hempel (the classical exposition may be found
in the introduction by F. Suppe to the volume [Sup.77]). While the Received
View is clearly a syntactical view, it is not the only incarnation a syntactical
view may have. The Received View is clearly a syntactical view in its advo-
cacy of formalizing theories by employing a formal language and presenting
it as an axiomatic calculus, but the fact that a theory is characterized as a
formal system does not by itself imply that the characterization follows the
Received View; as we shall argue briefly, there is much more to the Re-
ceived View than to a syntactical approach in general.
   Traditionally, the Received View is characterized by requiring that the-
ories be framed according to the following features:

Language: There is a formal language whose non-logical vocabulary is
  divided in two parts: VT and VO. VT is the set of theoretical terms, and
  VO is the set of observational terms. Notice that there is no restriction
  on the order of the language or kind of language to be used (it does
  not prohibit higher-order languages, modal languages, and so on; see
  for instance [Car.58]).
Logic: The language has a set of logical axioms, giving rise to its underlying
  logic (in general, type theory; see [Lut.12, sec.2]).
Theoretical postulates: A set of sentences written exclusively in the theoret-
  ical vocabulary is selected as the set of theoretical postulates, which we
  shall denote by T.
Semantics for VO: Observational terms receive an informal semantics relat-
  ing them to observable objects and events. This is related to the theory of
  meaning as verification adopted by the Logical Empiricists.
Correspondence rules: A set of sentences relating theoretical terms to obser-
  vational terms. These provide for a partial semantics for theoretical
  terms, relating them with immediate experience. We shall call C the set
  of correspondence rules.

   So, characterized by the aforementioned requirements, a theory is indi-
viduated by its theoretical postulates and its set of correspondence rules.
Let us call, accordingly, TC the resulting theory. It is of particular rele-
vance that by framing a theory with the specific choice of a language,
one already commits the theory with being characterized not only by its
postulates and correspondence rules but also with a specific vocabulary
and language.
   Now, each of those features the Received View demanded of a theory
received its share of criticism (see again the introduction to [Sup.77] for
the classical exposition and criticisms of the Received View; Muller
[Mul.11] also presents some of the same points). It is now almost a wide-
spread consensus that some of the demands of the Received View could
          The Quandary on the Characterization of Scientific Theories         5
not be achieved. In particular, there are many aspects that were very
closely tied to philosophical theses of the Vienna Circle and which
ended up leading the general program of the Logical Empiricists to its col-
lapse in its original form; those aspects inevitably led to problems in the
Received View too.
   Perhaps the most dramatic example of the mix between philosophical
tenets of the Logical Empiricists and their characterization of a theory
comes from the peculiar kind of relation between a theory and experience.
To mention some of the most prominent ones, there should be a match
between observational vocabulary and observable entities. The same
should also happen to theoretical vocabulary and non-observable entities.
However, it is really difficult to confine the observational vocabulary to
refer only to observable entities; depending on the use of quantifiers
along with the observational vocabulary, it is easy to produce sentences
in the observational vocabulary that do not relate directly with any experi-
ence. Also, depending on how one understands the relation of verification
by experience, it would be simple to produce examples of experiencing the-
oretical entities: for instance, by putting our fingers in the electric plug
(don’t do that), we have an experience of electric current, which should
be a non-observable entity.
   So the division in the vocabulary and its corresponding division between
kinds of entities is very problematic, to say the least (Kuhn, Feyerabend and
Hanson, for instance, made much of those difficulties, but we shall not
enter such a debate here; see the introduction to [Sup.77, sec.5]). Another
very difficult question concerns the precise role of the correspondence
rules. Carnap, for instance, had many difficulties in explaining how those
rules attribute meaning to theoretical terms. At first, it was required that
the correspondence rules had the form of an explicit definition, such as

    8xðTx $ FxÞ;


where T is a theoretical term and F is a sentence in the observational vocab-
ulary. That approach had many problems; in particular, it could not be em-
ployed to dispositional terms, such as ‘soluble’ and ‘fragile’. For instance, in
the case of fragility, it would lead to the implausible

    x is fragile $ (if x is severely beaten, then x breaks).

   The problem with that approach is that anything that is never beaten
ends up being fragile (due to traditional truth conditions associated with
the material conditional). So the requirement of explicit definition of theo-
retical terms had to be relaxed. Less stringent demands were soon provided
for, but had their own difficulties. One of the options consisted of corre-
spondence rules providing for conditionals, only partially defining the
6   The Quandary on the Characterization of Scientific Theories
meaning of theoretical terms. For instance, consider ‘fragile’ again. Then
the proposal by Carnap was the following:

    If x is severely beaten, then (x breaks $ x is fragile).

    It is difficult to specify what it means to provide only partial meaning to
theoretical terms, and related problems with analyticity helped to frustrate
the program.
    For a related problem associated with correspondence rules, it was
argued that demanding that the methods of application of a theory be
part of the formulation of the theory leads to inconvenient situations.
For instance, whenever a new method of application of a theory is discov-
ered (new apparatuses due to new technology, for instance), the formula-
tion of that theory must be changed accordingly, and we would literally
have a distinct theory. Also, requiring that correspondence rules be
included in the formulation of the theory seems to put the causal mecha-
nisms of theory test inside the theory itself, which is counterintuitive, to
say the least.
    In general, the main problem with the Received View concerns its simpli-
fied account of the relation between theory and experience. It relied heavily
on the empiricists dogma of reduction (sentences must be verified or corrob-
orated one by one) and were meant to introduce in the account of theories
the problematic verifiability criterion of meaning. However, notice that one
could in fact dispense with those peculiarities of the Received View in alter-
native forms of the syntactic approach: one needs not adhere to the tenets of
the Logical Empiricists to adopt a syntactical view of theories, with a
change in the mechanisms of the relation between theory and experience
being a nice starting point.
    But for our purposes here, much more important than those well-known
difficulties in the relation between theory and experience, which most
people consider unsurmountable, is the kind of attack leveled against the
use of formal languages made by the Received View. This kind of attack
is also considered unsurmountable, but the reasons given are not that con-
vincing. Typically, authors complaining about syntactical approaches (and
about the Received View, which as we mentioned is generally identified
with syntactical approaches) claim that the Received View adopts the
thesis that the correct language for formalizing empirical theories is a
first-order language, with an accompanying first-order logic (again, see
[Sup.77] and also [Mul.11] for that claim). That kind of language is
clearly inadequate for most scientific theories, and even for those theories
that can be written by using this kind of formalism, the resulting axiomat-
ization is awkward and impractical. In particular, the required mathematics
of a scientific theory would have to be wholly axiomatized from scratch,
leaving us with so much preliminary work to be done before getting to
the theory itself; that requirement not only distances the Received View
          The Quandary on the Characterization of Scientific Theories        7
from actual scientific practice but also would render the whole enterprise
useless for any scientific purpose.
   As an instance, consider the theory of complete ordered fields, which is
part of a good amount of scientific theories employing mathematics. First-
order languages are not adequate to axiomatize the theory; in particular,
one cannot provide an axiom for the least upper bound principle—which
characterizes the field of real numbers—as a single formula. In first-order
languages, we employ an axiom scheme:

    ð9xa ^ 9y8xða ! x  yÞÞ ! 9zð8xða ! x  zÞ^
       8yð8xða ! x  yÞ ! z  yÞÞ:

    Here α is any formula of the first-order language for ordered fields, and
x, y, and z are variables. The need to use a scheme of axioms and the exis-
tence of unintended countable models makes the theory uncategorical.
Second-order versions of the principle employ predicate variables in the
place of α, and then the axiom can be expressed as a single formula. As
it is well known, the second-order theory of complete fields is categorical.
The same kind of reasoning may be employed to argue that the theory of
well-orderings or cyclic groups are not elementary theories. One cannot
obtain the class of well-orderings with a set of first-order sentences; well-
ordering is not a first-order class. That is obviously a problem for those lim-
iting themselves to theories with first-order languages (see also [Kun.09,
p.89]).
    Against that line of criticism, it was argued by Lutz [Lut.12], with appeal
to a large textual evidence, that there is no reason to think that Carnap and
other adherents of the Received View ever demanded formalization in first-
order logics, with its devastatingly impractical consequences. In fact, most
of Carnap’s work explicitly employs the theory of types, which from a
logical point of view is enough to ground not only the required mathematics
but also the higher-order concepts involved in science (see for instance
[Car.58]). Furthermore, formalization in general, as seen by these
authors, did not demand an exhaustive axiomatization of all the mathemat-
ics required: it is enough to know that the relevant mathematics can be de-
veloped inside type theory. Once it is known how to develop the required
mathematics, one may proceed to deal exclusively with the empirical
science one is concerned with.
    So the objection that the use of first-order languages leads to the failure
of the Received View is based on a widespread misunderstanding. In fact,
due to the large amount of evidence that the proponents of the Received
View (mainly Carnap) did not require exclusive use of first-order languages,
it is strange, to say the least, that opponents of the view have focused for so
long a time on that aspect.
    The objections against languages did not stop at the supposed inadequa-
cies of first-order languages. As argued generally, and made famous by van
8   The Quandary on the Characterization of Scientific Theories
Fraassen and Suppe, one of the main problems with the Received View and
syntactic approaches in general concerns the use of a specific vocabulary
and of axiomatization in such vocabulary. Given that a theory is identified
with its linguistic formulation (in axiomatic terms), it would result in im-
possible formulations of the same theory in alternative vocabularies.
Now, that claim involves two kinds of presuppositions. One of them is
that the Received View did not have means to account for the use of distinct
vocabularies in the formulation of a theory. The second concerns the very
idea, widespread among critics of the Received View, that a theory is iden-
tified with its formulation. Do those criticisms really hit the Received View?
What are the consequences for a syntactical approach that does not neces-
sarily adopt all the features of a theory as required by the Received View?
    As to the first problem, viz., the use of a specific formulation, it seems
clear that the Received View need not be that specific. As Halvorson
[Hal.15, p.5] and Lutz [Lut.15, p.7] argued, the Received View, and in
general any syntactical view, need not be committed to the individuation
of a theory as formulated in a particular language: one may clearly
accept equivalent formulations of a theory. That requires certainly a
notion of theory equivalence, but it is clear that such equivalence may be
formulated in distinct terms, such as definitional equivalence or equivalence
by translations (see [Hal.12, p.191] for definitional equivalence and also
[Mul.11, Sec. 6] for translations between distinct formulations). In particu-
lar, there is no evidence that the Received View was committed with the in-
dividuation of a theory by its vocabulary.
    So syntactical approaches in general are not tied to the use of a specific
language forever. This should be clear from Carnap’s writings, for instance,
but was constantly repeated and pointed out as a definitive failure of the
syntactical approaches in general. Closely related to this claim, there is
another very widespread view about the aims of the Received View (and
of the semantic view and syntactic approaches in general): it provides for
an explication of the concept of ‘theory’. Suppe [Sup.77, pp.57–61], in
his famous introduction, identified the whole project of providing a charac-
terization of theories by the Received View as an attempt to provide an ex-
plication of the concept of theory in general. Halvorson [Hal.12, Hal.15]
also adopts that view, even though his sympathies lie with syntactic
approaches.
    The main problem with that approach concerns how an explication is to
be understood according to Carnap, for instance. An explication of a
certain concept C, the explicandum, consists of the development of a new
concept C , the explicatum. The relation between explicandum and expli-
catum in the Received View, according to Suppe, is such that the explica-
tum is a precisification of the explicandum. In other words, i) every
positive instance of a C should also count as a positive instance of C ,
ii) every negative instance of C should also count as a negative instance
of C , iii) C must be more precise than C whenever possible, and iv) C
          The Quandary on the Characterization of Scientific Theories         9
should be fruitful. We can then use C to decide about cases in which we
ain’t sure whether something is a C or not. That view on explication,
then, applied to theories, means that the Received View should be seen as
advancing an explicatum for the intuitive informal notion of scientific
theory, the explicandum.
   Now, by understanding explication as a precisification, it is clear that the
Received View should fare rather badly. Indeed, almost any approach
making use of formal methods will have its problems with such an ap-
proach. Obviously, not every scientific theory in the intuitive sense can be
axiomatized as a formal system. Also, not every formal system in accor-
dance with the rules of the Received View counts as a theory (it is easy
to produce simple counterexamples). So Suppe concludes that the Received
View failed in this aspect too, while the semantic approach (which we shall
present soon) does much better.
   However, it is clear that Carnap and other adherents of the Received
View did not adopt a precisificationist view of explication. As argued in
[Lut.12, sec.5], Carnap did allow some deviation from common use in ex-
plications. The proper rigorous explication of a concept in scientific terms
in general advances deviations from common use; in fact, as Carnap
himself advances an example, the scientific explication of the term ‘Fish’ re-
places it by another concept, let us call it ‘Piscis’. Those concepts do not co-
incide: while Fish counts whales and seals as its instances, Piscis is much
narrower and excludes those cases (See [Lut.12, p.101] for the full quota-
tion and discussion; it is curious that Halvorson [Hal.15] mentions
Suppe’s account [Sup.77] of explication as illuminating, while at the
same time making reference to Lutz’s [Lut.12] paper, which has a much
more convincing analysis.)
   As suggested by Lutz [Lut.12, sec.5], perhaps it would be useful to see
the Received View as a rational reconstruction of particular theories and
not as a general reconstruction of the concept of a theory. As Carnap
was aware of, not every theory is so developed that it can be axiomatized
and presented in the canonical form proposed by the Received View. So
that kind of presentation should be seen as an ideal, a model in which the-
ories developed enough can be presented in order for us to study the empir-
ical meaning of them (or whatever else we are interested in about the
theory). So some of the most telling problems for the Received View, say
those concerning its adequacy as an explication of the term theory, may
be overcome by recognizing that such an explication of the general
concept of theory is not what is really at stake; rather, what is presented
is a method or formal tool for the study of specific theories. It may be
useful for certain purposes in certain circumstances, but it may not work
for other purposes (see also [DutRec.15] for further relations between expli-
cations and the use of formal methods).
   Let us now put together some of what the previous discussion has en-
lightened: a syntactic approach to theories does not need to employ every
10 The Quandary on the Characterization of Scientific Theories
aspect of the Received View. In particular, those aspects that were already
found as lacking, such as the specific relation between theories and experi-
ence, the specific division of the vocabulary into theoretical and observa-
tional, and the use of rules of correspondence, for instance, need not to
be present. Also, the use of some particular language need not commit us
to the identification of a theory with its particular formulation: i) on the
one hand, the use of formal languages can be made compatible with distinct
formulations being required only a notion of equivalence between theories
and ii) there is no need of an identification of a theory with anything; in
fact, the use of some formal method is not meant to provide for a definition
or explication of the concept of a theory. The use of some syntactical
method is a resource that philosophers of science and those interested in
the foundations of science may deploy for the purposes of their work.
   In general, then, we agree with Lutz [Lut.15, p.7] when he characterizes
an approach to theories as syntactical if it comprises the following, in
general lines:

Formal language: the theory is formulated in some formal language (possi-
  bly a higher-order language).
Theoretical equivalence: a relation of equivalence between formulations is
  provided (so that distinct formulations count as formulation of the same
  theory).
Interpretation: some sentences are interpreted (to grant that we are dealing
  with empirical theories).

   Notice that the most troublesome aspects of the Received View are
absent or need not to be included. In particular, the requirement of interpre-
tation need not be framed in terms of correspondence rules or any other re-
striction due to the Received View.


1.2   THE SEMANTIC APPROACH

Traditionally, the semantic approach is said to have been born along with
the development of model theory by Tarski, in the 1950s (see also
[CosFre.03, chap.2–3]). Particularly influential in developing the approach
are the works of Suppes from the ’50s onward (see for instance [Sups.60,
Sups.67]), which we shall follow closely here. Although Suppes may be
seen as leading the semantic approach, there is not really a unified view
that could be called the semantic approach in opposition to the Received
View; in particular, depending on how ‘models’ are understood, the view
takes on distinct versions, which vary also as to how models are related
to reality and what role language plays in characterizing a scientific theory.
   Now, given the existence of disagreement on what precisely models are
and how they relate to reality, we shall here adhere to what may be called
         The Quandary on the Characterization of Scientific Theories            11
the hegemonic version of the semantic approach. While this may be contro-
versial, we shall restrict the scope of what we call the semantic view here
and focus on the set-theoretical development of models, leaving aside
other kinds of models that also feature in those discussions. This should
not strike the reader as a big restriction, given that some of the most
recent discussions on the syntax-semantics debate were drawn from this
kind of approach to model theory.
   Following this particular kind of approach to models, most authors con-
sider that the semantic approach involves the following main features:

Models: A theory is seen as a class of models.
Set theoretical structures: Models are set theoretical structures.
Language independence: A theory is independent of language.

   As we mentioned before, ‘models’ here are taken as set-theoretical
entities; that is, entities built inside some set theory (typically Zermelo–
Fraenkel set theory, as we shall see in the chapters that follow). Following
model theory and the work of Tarski, one could think that a model, prop-
erly speaking, is an ordered pair

    hD; ri;

where D is a non-empty set and ρ is an interpretation function relating the
non-logical vocabulary of a formal language with the corresponding set-
theoretical entities: individual constant symbols are mapped to elements
of D, n-ary function symbols are mapped to n-ary functions over D, and
n-ary predicate symbols are mapped to n-ary relations over D.
   That is a typical kind of description of a model found in the context of the
semantic approach. However, notice that some simple shortcomings seem to
be forgotten by this specific use of ‘model’ here. First of all, characterized
like that, models are what are usually called ‘first-order models’: models
for languages of first-order, comprising only what we call order-1 (first-
order) structures.1 By sticking with these models one cannot solve the
problem of keeping restricted to first-order languages. Really, there are rel-
evant theories, both in mathematics and in the empirical sciences that cannot
be modeled by order-1 structures, requiring structures of higher order. For
instance, well-orderings are not classes of models according to that charac-
terization that is, a well-ordering is not a order-1 structure, as is easy to note.
   Order-1 structures can be models only for first-order languages and the-
ories written in those languages, which makes the difficulties of first-order
languages reflect in the models that may be characterized by those lan-
guages. As a second problem, related to the first one, it only makes sense
to call a structure a model provided we have a set of axioms that are
modeled by the structures in the mentioned set. In fact, models are
models of something, and in the present case study, they are models of
12 The Quandary on the Characterization of Scientific Theories
some axiomatics. In that sense, the semantic approach would predate over a
form of syntactic approach: only once we have the axioms of the theory
(that is, characterize it syntactically) can we characterize the theory seman-
tically. But, as we shall see, it is not necessary to follow all the steps sug-
gested by the Received View.
   Now, even though those problems and limitations are generally over-
looked in the literature on the semantic approach, the greatest challenge
to the previous characterization of models would be its violation of the lan-
guage independence requirement; that requirement seems to prohibit any
characterization of models that involve interpreting a language. As van
Fraassen [vanF.89, p.366] has emphasized, the advantages of the semantic
approach would be lost if language were allowed to play that role. Here it
should be understood that those advantages include being free from any
specific language; being a structure related with a specific language would
render the theory formulation-dependent (or, at least, so the argument
goes). In this sense, if that advantage of the semantic approach is to be pre-
served, it seems that the interpretation function must be left out of the
account of a model adequate for the semantic approach. Instead of
models in the Tarskian sense, perhaps the semanticist really means
another kind of set-theoretical construct when she speaks about models
(see also [Mul.11, sec.6] for this kind of discussion).
   The most common alternative for the characterization of models in this
case is to allow that the relevant ‘models’ are in fact set-theoretical struc-
tures: entities of the kind

    hD; Ri ii2I ;

where, again, D is a non-empty set and Ri is a family of relations on the el-
ements of D (perhaps comprising also operations and distinguished ele-
ments, all of which may be seen as special cases of relations). Here it is
important to note that the Ri need not relate only members of D, giving
rise to higher-order structures or, as we prefer to call them, order-n struc-
tures, with n > 1 (we shall discuss such structures in chapter 5). For in-
stance, a group is a set-theoretical structure that may be written as

    hG; ; e; i;

where G is a non-empty set,  is the composition function, e is the identity
element, and—is the inverse operation. Here we have only operations over
elements of D, so it is an order-1 structure. A topological space, on the
other hand, is a structure hD, τi, where t 2 PðPðDÞÞ. That is, τ is a
family of subsets of D, so we have a structure or order greater than one.
   Now, if that suggestion is the case (and it really seems to be), then it is
difficult to see what the structures thus gathered are models of. One
option, as we shall see later (see chapters 5 and 6 on Suppes’s predicates)
         The Quandary on the Characterization of Scientific Theories        13
is to say that they are models of a Suppes predicate, a set-theoretical
formula axiomatizing a theory inside set theory. But then the notion of
‘model’ is rather different from Tarski’s sense of model, and there is no
proper model theory, given that they are higher-order structures. In the
end, it seems, there is a dilemma to be faced: either the relevant models
for the semantic approach are models in the Tarskian sense or else they
are not models in that desired sense they are not ‘semantic’ in the sense
of making anything true. In the first case, they are inconvenient because
they involve language; in the second sense, it is difficult to say what is
really semantics in the semantic approach. Anyway, one must put con-
straints on how the structures are gathered. For instance, in the case of to-
pological space, there is not any structure of the form hD, τi where τ must
satisfy some standard requirements! Language seems important here, as we
have mentioned.
    Later on we shall argue that the mentioned dilemma is not really a
problem if we abandon, as we think we should, the idea that theories are
formulation-independent and/or language-free. This requirement, as we
shall put it, comes from a desire to identify theories with something; our
purpose, as we shall argue, is to provide distinct representations of theories,
and in that case, it is not a problem that a representation is framed in a spe-
cific language (as most representations are).
    Before proceeding, let us already fix then the first divide between two
notions of ‘model’ that will be relevant for our further investigations.
Both are set-theoretical entities, but they operate in distinct ways. It
seems that those adhering to the ‘language-free’ ideal should submit that
the ‘models’ the semantic approach speaks about are merely set-theoretical
structures; there is no language in which those structures are interpreted,
that is, sets and relations over those sets (in a general characterization).
The best we may have is a ‘satisfaction’ of a Suppes predicate, an approach
to axiomatization that proceeds in the language of set theory itself without
requiring a separate formal language for a structure. As we shall discuss
later, however, ‘satisfaction’ here has a different sense than the traditional
model theoretic one, as we shall see. Those not adhering to the ‘language-
free’ ideal may still think that the models work just as models in the sense of
model theory developed by Tarski (although they may also be models of
higher-order languages; see also [KraAreMor.11]). As we shall argue in
the next chapters, adherents to the semantic approach were not always
clear about this. This distinction was even the topic of a heated debate in
the philosophy of science (see [Hal.12] for the first sparkle, and [Lut.15]
for the general overview; see also our [KraAreMor.11], where the distinc-
tion was already clearly drawn).
    These disputes about the proper meaning of models notwithstanding,
what most adherents of the semantic approach agree with is that identifying
theories with classes of models allows us to avoid most of the problems
faced by the Received View. Recall that it is this comparison between the
14 The Quandary on the Characterization of Scientific Theories
two approaches that sets, in general, the particular dialectics of the debate,
putting the Received View (and syntactic approaches in general) in rather
unfavorable lights. Due to the alleged language independence of models,
theories (taken as a class of models) are independent of their formulations.
The same theory can be presented as associated with distinct languages, and
none of them are essential to it. Also, there is no need to be worried with
formal details of axiomatization in first-order languages; it is enough to
specify directly the class of models inside some set theory. In this case,
the expressive capability of the semantic approach is said to go much
beyond the Received View. Finally, to present a theory as a class of
models seems to bring us closer to scientific practice, given that scientists
are model builders, not theorem provers (see [Hal.15] for a summary of
the typical advantages claimed in the name of the semantic approach).
    As we have already mentioned, the semantic approach has been devel-
oped in a much more informal way than the Received View (even though
it is most of the time said to be a descendent of Tarski). The idea that
one can identify a theory with a class of models and that one can even
collect a class of models without essential use of a language went largely
unanalyzed through many years, until recently Muller [Mul.11] and Hal-
vorson [Hal.12] have taken it seriously and found the idea lacking. The
main difficulty, as we shall see, derives from a tendency to identify a
theory with a class of models, while providing for no relation of equivalence
between classes of models other than identity of classes.
    First of all, informal theories have distinct informal presentations,
which may seem to lead to distinct classes of models. As an example,
Hamiltonian mechanics and Lagrangean mechanics seem to be the same
theory, but are certainly not represented by the same class of models;
they even employ distinct mathematical apparatuses. Something similar
holds to Schrödinger’s and Heisenberg’s versions of quantum mechanics.
In the absence of a criterion of theoretical equivalence, there is nothing in
the semantic approach that allows us to grant that intuitive equivalence.
In fact, some philosophers adhering to the semantic view have employed
such formal dissimilarities to argue that Hamiltonian and Lagrangean ver-
sions of classical mechanics are not the same theories (see [Hal.12, p.187]
for the discussions and references). So from an intuitive point of view, the
semantic approach seems to fail in individuating theories. This, as we
mentioned, seems to be a result from bare identification of an intuitive
theory with its class of models.
    For another main difficulty, it is clear that even some simple theories
such as group theory, may be presented as distinct kinds of structures.
For instance, one may present it as a pair hG, i, with a non-empty set
and a binary operation satisfying the axioms for groups. Alternatively,
groups may be presented as hG, , e, i, which we did before (this also sat-
isfied the axioms for groups, which now involved the concepts of neutral
element and opposite). Both kinds of structures are certainly distinct, and
         The Quandary on the Characterization of Scientific Theories        15
classes of the first kind are not identical to classes of the second. As Muller
[Mul.11, sec.6] and Halvorson [Hal.12] argued, if we had an accompanying
language, then we would be able to employ notions such as translatability
or mutual definability to show both theories equivalent. But, given an im-
plicit prohibition on the use of language due to the desire of being ‘lan-
guage-free’, it seems that any such use would be troublesome. The
general impression is that any appeal to language would throw us back
to the Received View, which clearly is not the case! On the other hand, it
is also argued that only language could help us in avoiding the problems,
which is also clearly not the case. This illustrates how some cherished fea-
tures of the semantic approach may also easily distract us from what is
relevant.
   Language was also recently involved in another controversy related to
the concepts of morphisms — in particular, certain kinds of embeddings
and isomorphisms. Isomorphisms, for instance, are important in the seman-
tic approach, in particular for the relation between models of distinct theo-
ries, when we wish to claim that a theory is an extension of the other
(horizontal relations between theories). They are also important to
account for the relations between a model of the theory and data models
(vertical relations), which are then responsible for the relation between a
theory and experience. This is a main feature distinguishing the kind of
semantic approach we are taking into account here from the Received View.
   According to Suppes [Sups.60, Sups.67], for instance, and van Fraassen
[vanF.80, p.56], a theory is applied to reality not directly, as in the case of
the Received View, but through a hierarchy of structures. Roughly speaking
(see [Sups.60] for details), we begin with simple experiments and construct
a structure to model the phenomena. That is in general a qualitative model,
which by itself does not take into account every feature of experience; as
Suppes says, experience must be passed through a ‘conceptual grinder’ in
order to be ready to be taken into account and related with a theory
[Sups.67, p.62]. Later, it is necessary to find a numerical model isomorphic
to the model of the phenomena. Only then can numbers be applied to
things. This structure than may be embedded in still some larger structures
before being embedded in a model of the theory. Models of the theory in
general use mathematical concepts that don’t have analogous in experience,
and so cannot be directly applied to nature. So, even though this was a very
rough description of the relation between theories and data, isomorphisms
are involved throughout the whole process.
   However, Halvorson [Hal.12] argued that the idea of isomorphism (and
embeddings in general) do not make sense in the absence of a language. It is
language that would be responsible for granting that each relation in a
structure is mapped in a correspondent in another structure, which is the
interpretation of the same symbol. In other words, without language, ac-
cording to Halvorson, an isomorphism between structures hD, Rii and
hE, Kii must be composed by both a bijection f between D and E and
16 The Quandary on the Characterization of Scientific Theories
also by a function g sending each Ri into some Kj. An isomorphism then is
such that for any n-ary Ri, we have

    hd1 ; . . . dn i 2 Ri iff hf ðd1 Þ . . . f ðdn Þi 2 gðRi Þ:

So, for instance, given a structure hD, A1, A2 . . . Ani and another structure
hE, B1, B2 . . . Bni there is no way to grant that A1 will correspond to B1;
that will happen only when g(A1) ¼ B1, but that is not mandatory. The
claim by Halvorson is that by having a language, the possible mixing of
properties would be forbidden.
   This definition of isomorphism is enough to allow for some tragedies,
such as allowing that structures that differ in the true values they attribute
to sentences turn out to be isomorphic (see [Hal.12, p.192] and [Lut.15] for
a discussion). For instance, consider two theories in a first-order language
with identity containing a denumerable family of unary predicate symbols
P1, P2, . . . as its non-logical vocabulary. Theory T1 has as axioms only
the formula 9!x(x ¼ x), where 9! is the uniqueness quantifier; the axiom
then states that there is only one thing in the domain of quantification.
The interpretation of each Pi is then arbitrary on the domain containing
only one element. Let T2 be composed of the axiom of T1 along with the
infinite collection of formulas of the form P1 ! Pn, for every n. Any
model of T2 will also have only one element in the domain of quantifica-
tion, but will have to make sentences of the form P1 ! Pn true. Both the-
ories are intuitively not equivalent, but, with the aforementioned notion of
isomorphism, it is easy to show that for any model of T1 there is an isomor-
phic model of T2 and vice-versa
   The main problem comes from the desire to make theories language inde-
pendent. The fact that we cannot appeal to language to grant that, for in-
stance, given a bijection f between the domains of interpretation, f must
preserve the interpretation of P1, allowing us to mix the interpretations of
the predicate symbols (the role of the function g in the aforementioned
definition). So, if the theories are isomorphic, they should be elementarily
equivalent, which is clearly not the case.2 Then being language-free poses
some problems, according to Halvorson, which point to an inadequacy of
the semantic approach on the individuation of theories.
   As we shall see later, the notion of isomorphism employed by Halvorson
is not the correct one. There is a standard notion of isomorphism between
structures that employs the labels of the relations in a structure to grant that
structures have a similarity kind. So only structures of the same similarity
kind will allow for the definition of isomorphism without the need of a lan-
guage. What is relevant is that structures have the form hD, Riii2I, where
the index set I orders the relations; isomorphisms must somehow observe
that order: relations with the same indexes must be preserved. So isomor-
phisms may be defined both in the presence as well as in the absence of a
language in which the structures are interpreted; both approaches to
         The Quandary on the Characterization of Scientific Theories       17
models as we have presented them are allowed to use the concept
meaningfully.
   So, perhaps, the conflict between structures that are interpreted in a
formal language and structures that are not interpreted is not a substantial
debate. In fact, that is precisely the conclusion arrived at by Lutz [Lut.15]:
the debate between allowing a language and not allowing a language may
be easily dispelled when we notice that a structure such as hD, Riii2I, called
indexed structure, may be converted into a Tarski-style structure when we
allow the set I of labels to be the non-logical vocabulary of a language. If
that is the case, the indexing is precisely an interpretation, and we have a
labeled structure. There is no reason for accepting one of those kinds of
structures and denying the other.
   Our approach in this book will be to accept both kinds of structures
(given that they are convertible into one another). This is in fact a lesson
to be learned from Suppes’s [Sups.67, p.60] presentation of the first features
of the semantic approach. According to Suppes, a theory may be presented
in two complementary ways: either following an intrinsic approach or else
following an extrinsic approach. The intrinsic approach comprises the stan-
dard axiomatization using linguistic resources. When no such axiomatiza-
tion is available, or is just too cumbersome, we may adopt the extrinsic
approach of characterizing the class of models directly in set theory. For
that, as we shall argue, we may employ what is called a ‘Suppes predicate’,
which helps us in collecting the relevant models.
   In the end, the distinction comes not from the kind of structure em-
ployed, but rather on styles of axiomatization. While employing formal lan-
guages, we think immediately about formal theories, with their axioms
framed in the formal language when we talk about structures as purely
set-theoretical constructs we are employing a Suppes predicate to gather
the structures. Both approaches are interesting and each has its own advan-
tages, as we shall see. So Suppes argued that the model approach is superior
when it comes to studying the relation between theory and data and when
axiomatization issues appear. In particular, he argued that using set theory
as the language in which to develop the class of models allows us to avoid
axiomatization of the required mathematics of a theory: all of the mathe-
matics may be assumed as already developed inside set theory. So we
may proceed directly to the empirical part of the theory that concerns us.
Anyway, what is more relevant is that Suppes himself did not require
that we abandon language in any sense (see in particular the remarks
in [Sups.11, sec.2]). Philosophers of science may benefit from both
approaches: they are representations of theories, and the most adequate
approach will depend on what we need.
   This is a lesson that should be already learned from Suppes’s distinction
between intrinsic and extrinsic characterization. That distinction was em-
ployed by da Costa and French [CosFre.03] for many purposes. In particu-
lar, the extrinsic approach (along with the partial structures approach) was
18 The Quandary on the Characterization of Scientific Theories
employed to represent theories and their relation with experience. The in-
trinsic approach, on the other hand, was employed to discuss propositional
attitudes such as what does it mean to believe in a theory. Belief is directed
toward propositions, so it requires a linguistic approach. It is curious that
the benefits of such a distinction went largely unnoticed. What is relevant
for us is that theories are merely represented in the philosophy of science
for philosophical purposes. What they really are goes beyond such represen-
tations, possibly. Our focus will be on the fact that semantic and syntactical
approaches are representational tools for philosophical purposes.
   The adherents of the semantic approach, then, went wrong in simply
claiming that a theory may be identified with a class of models. That left
them with no option but to employ identity of classes as identity of theories,
which lead them astray. Also, that identification left the impression that a
theory is independent of language. Again, much trouble appeared for the
identity of theories. Difficult questions such as whether theories are the
same or not troubled the view. We shall propose, then, in the next section,
a more flexible consideration of both semantic as well as syntactic ap-
proaches, following the lines of Lutz [Lut.15], as well as [KraAreMor.11].


1.3   SCIENTIFIC THEORIES AND PHILOSOPHICAL TOOLS

Perhaps the greatest lesson we have learned from those discussions is
simple: deep problems arise when we attempt to identify a theory with
something (i.e., to reify theories, to use van Fraassen’s [vanF.89, p.222]
famous terms). The Received View faces many obvious inadequacies, for in-
stance, if we identify a theory with a formulation comprising a specific lan-
guage and a specific set of correspondence rules. In the same way, the
semantic approach faces many difficulties if a theory is identified with a
class of models: the corresponding criterion of theory identity will identify
theories that are distinct and differentiate theories that are intuitively the
same.
   Facing all those difficulties, it seems that a distinct approach should be
taken. Perhaps a good try would be to consider that both the syntactic ap-
proach as well as the semantic approach are not philosophical theories
about the nature of something, viz., scientific theories. Or even better, they
should not be treated like that, even though they have been treated this
way. As Lutz [Lut.15] has remarked, the whole debate was based on misun-
derstandings, and whether one decides to focus on languages or on set-
theoretical structures depends on the main interests in the moment and on
which approach affords more convenience. Philosophical approaches to
scientific theories should not be censored for not capturing the essence of
scientific theorizing; they strive at capturing aspects of such a diverse theoriz-
ing (see also the conciliatory note by Halvorson [Hal.15, p.15], according to
whom “these approaches need not be seen as competitors”).
        The Quandary on the Characterization of Scientific Theories           19
    This idea may be traced back to some of the first proponents of each
view. Recall our brief discussion on Carnap on explication: as we men-
tioned, the goal of the Received View was not to provide for a general ex-
plication of the concept ‘theory’, but to provide general guidelines to study
philosophical problems of scientific theories. Obviously, the problems and
the guidelines were seen through the lenses of logical empiricism, but that
is not the problem. What is relevant is that for many purposes of philosoph-
ical investigation, an approach is available that helps philosophers shape
their questions and look for answers.
    Again, as Lutz [Lut.12, sec.5] remarked, an explication could work as a
rational reconstruction of an intuitive concept. In the case of particular
theories, the Received View worked as an ideal form that scientific theo-
ries should be put in and from which philosophers could then study impor-
tant relations between theoretical terms and their meanings and whatever
other philosophical problem should interest them. Obviously, the Re-
ceived View failed in providing a convincing framework in its overall
form, but that happened for reasons that are generally not pointed out
by the critics.
    The same may be said of the semantic approach. In discussing the rela-
tion between theory and experiment, Suppes [Sups.67, p.63] noted that
“there is no simple answer to be given” to the question “What is a scientific
theory?” He further remarked that a precise answer to that question is not
important. What is relevant is

    to recognize that the existence of a hierarchy of theories arising form
    the methodology of experimentation for testing the fundamental
    theory is an essential ingredient of any sophisticated scientific discipline.
                                                               [Sups.67, p.64]

That is, for the point on which he was concerned, which was to understand
the relation between theory and experiment, it matters more that we under-
stand the proper relations of experience of the theory with testing than that
we answer the question, what is a scientific theory? An for those concerns,
he argued, an extrinsic approach is more appropriate. This is also clear
from Suppes’s [Sups.11, sec.2] observation that his approach is not the
same as van Fraassen’s: the latter attempts to formulate a theory as free
of language and has left it very far from experiment. This is clearly not ad-
equate for the purposes Suppes had in the moment.
   So, taken seriously, those views by Carnap and Suppes seem to lead us to
a distinct direction, other than those that the whole debate has taken. They
seem to concede that the purpose of offering an approach to theories is not
to capture the essence of a general concept, but rather to provide the formal
tools for us to study and develop what for us, as philosophers, matters the
most (which in general includes topics such as truth, belief in theories, ac-
ceptance, empirical adequacy, and so on). That is also the general line we
20 The Quandary on the Characterization of Scientific Theories
shall take in the following chapters. They should not be read as an attempt
to provide the tools for a definition of theories, but rather as furnishing
frameworks in which certain kinds of studies may be taken. Our focus
shall be on logical and metamathematical issues with foundational pur-
poses, so this goal should also be kept in mind.
   Perhaps it would be appropriate to insist again on a topic recently raised
by French [Fre.15, p.14]: the semantic approach, the syntactic approach,
and any other approach to theories are just representations of theories de-
veloped for philosophical purposes. They are not to be confused with the
thing itself. What are those theories in and of themselves? Do theories
even exist? Those are surely interesting issues, but they may be developed
independently from the semantic and syntactical approaches. They are
really to be treated as rational reconstructions and may be judged
accordingly.
   Having that point of view stated clearly, we shall now proceed to the
topic of axiomatization of theories, perhaps the first step for foundational
and metamathematical studies (which is what concerns us here).


NOTES

   1. As we shall see later, we distinguish between the order of a language from
      the order of a structure, hence the distinction in the notation.
   2. We recall that elementary equivalent theories are those first-order theories
      that satisfy the same first-order sentences. A precise definition can be seen,
      for instance, in [Men.97].
2     Axiomatization




Why to axiomatize? When we think about the logical foundations of
science, the use of the axiomatic method arises as a rather natural idea.
The axiomatic method is unique in allowing us to organize a field of knowl-
edge and put it in a logically coherent structure; it clarifies and provides a
sharp understanding of how distinct parts of the body of knowledge,
when axiomatized, connect themselves, giving us the edifice of the whole
discipline. Besides, the possibility of metatheoretical studies is another
great advantage of rigorous formulation delivered by the axiomatic
method, an advantage that must be explored for foundational studies. So,
in the face of it, we take it that the axiomatic method is the preferred
tool for the kind of study we wish to approach here. As we discussed
rather briefly in the previous chapter, the main differences between ap-
proaches to theories may also be expressed as differences in styles of axi-
omatization. So a first look at the general features of the method is not
only convenient, but also required.
   Even though the use of the axiomatic method (AM) is nowadays
common practice in mathematics, the historical roots of its use go back
to the early Greeks and their study of philosophy. Of course, a great deal
of applied mathematical knowledge had already been achieved by the Bab-
ylonians and Egyptians, but it stood more for ‘collections of prescriptions’
for doing practical calculations than for an organized field of knowledge
[Sza.64]. These people did not seem to think of their mathematical knowl-
edge as an edifice, resting on a set of basic accepted (i.e., not proved) prop-
ositions whose truth would be enough to derive the truth of all other known
mathematical propositions. As Szabó suggests, that was achieved by the
Greeks, and not in mathematics properly, but in philosophy:

    [they] [the Greeks] seem to have come to this [that is, to the idea that
    the starting principles should not be proved] from the practice of dialec-
    tic. They were accustomed to the fact that, when one of the partners in
    a debate wanted to prove something to the other, he was bound to start
    from an assertion accepted as true by both of them.
                                                                    [Sza.65]1
22 Axiomatization
An influential example suggested by this author was the use of indirect rea-
soning, now known as reductio ad absurdum by the Eleactics, mainly by
Zeno of Elea.
    Still in ancient times, Aristotle in his Analytica Posteriora declared that the
axiomatic method was the method for the presentation of a deductive science
(see [JonBet.10]). The basic idea behind the use of axiomatization is to
present a certain field of knowledge in such a way that once certain assump-
tions are made, every other proposition that is true in the field can be deduced
from these basic assumptions, today called postulates or axioms.2 In this
sense, the AM is to be applied to an already sufficiently known field of
knowledge, and its main role would be ‘hygienic’, ordering propositions in
the following sense: to avoid a regress to the infinite, we first select some
set of concepts that we suppose are the basic notions to start with; they
must be sufficient to allow us to define every other required concept. These
basic notions are the primitive notions (or primitive concepts) of the
system. The remaining concepts are defined from the primitive ones (also
called derived concepts). The second step is to select some propositions,
which are taken as primitive, consisting of the statements upon which the
system is built. These propositions are written exclusively in terms of primi-
tive notions and the defined concepts. All other statements of the theory must
be obtained from the primitive ones by deduction and are then called theo-
rems of the system. This kind of construction would make explicit the
whole development of a field of knowledge: each concept employed is
either primitive or explicitly defined, and each accepted proposition is
either primitive or explicitly derived from previously accepted propositions.
    As is well known, the paradigmatic example of an application of this
method in ancient times is Euclid’s Elements (4 BC), which attempted to sys-
tematize the mathematics known by the Greeks up to that time. Euclid’s
book has been a major influence in Western thought since then, an ideal of
rigor to be pursued by mathematicians and philosophers until the nineteenth
century. Its influence notwithstanding, it is now recognized that Euclid’s pre-
sentation does not conform to the standards of rigor demanded by the
modern use of this technique. On what concerns the presentation of primitive
concepts, Euclid’s book unexpectedly attempts to provide those terms with
definitions. Some historians think those definitions could have been intro-
duced not by Euclid himself, but by later commentators in order to
‘explain’ the meaning of the basic notions [Eucl.08]. As a result, it is hard
to find in the Elements explicit primitive notions. On what concerns the the-
orems, which should be proved solely in terms of the axioms and previously
proved theorems, the Elements also have some failures. For instance, the
proof of Proposition 1 (Theorem 1) employs resources not covered by the
previous assumptions (axioms or previously proved theorems).3 Anyway,
despite of the problems found in it, Euclid’s book provided for a wonderful
illustration of the general idea: every proposition to be accepted must be
                                                          Axiomatization     23
either postulated or else derived (deduced) from propositions which were
postulated or already proven before.4
    A new attitude on what concerns the axiomatic method was deeply in-
volved with the development of mathematics itself. During the nineteenth
century, mathematics went through another great transformation with the
raise of abstract mathematical structures. Groups, rings, fields, geometries,
algebras in general, topological structures, and all such rich varieties of ab-
stract structures came to light and put this discipline in another paradigmatic
level from which it will never return (but see the criticisms in chapter 4). The
AM was essential for such developments. The nineteenth century also saw
the birth of modern logic, which soon could also be studied as an abstract
mathematical theory. The development of these two fields originated the
mathematics of the twentieth century and perhaps still (in a sense to be dis-
cussed later in this chapter) of the twenty-first century too.
    Recall that in Aristotle’s and Euclid’s time, the choice of primitive con-
cepts and primitive propositions was subject to a condition of intuitive
clarity and intuitive truth, respectively. Given that primitive concepts were
intuitively clear, the defined concepts could be intuitively understood as
well. Given that the primitive propositions were necessarily true and intui-
tively evident, the propositions derived from them were all true as well.5
As a result of the revolution that began in the nineteenth century, the
choice of the primitive notions and postulates are no longer subject to such
demands. The postulates are assumed because they are useful for the
purpose in mind: they serve for the intended finalities, namely, to derive
the theorems. David Hilbert’s 1899 axiomatization of Euclidean geometry
makes use of three primitive notions, namely, those of point, straight
line, and plane, and three relations holding among them, incidence, between-
ness and congruence. Defined notions are, for instance, right angle, parallel
lines, and so on (the definitions are not relevant for our purposes). But the
Italian mathematician Mario Pieri presented an axiomatic for Euclidean
and Bolyai-Lobachewskian geometry based on only two primitive notions:
point and motion;6 in this axiomatics, straight line and plane are defined con-
cepts. From these axioms, all geometric theorems can be obtained. This
shows that, in principle, there is no mathematical concept (and we could
say the same also for the empirical theories) that cannot be defined; definabil-
ity is relative to the language employed (see chapter 5 on definability).
    Other assumptions from ancient times that are also relaxed include the
demand that the postulates must be all independent; that is, a postulate
should not be deducible from the remaining ones. This is taken now as a
matter of convenience. Sometimes a redundant axiomatics is preferable
for ease of treatment. A typical example is the Zermelo — Fraenkel set
theory to be seen later, where the Pair Axiom may be derived from the Sub-
stitution Axiom and the Power Set Axiom. Historically, as the axiomatic
method evolved, some of the ancient demands of intuitiveness were being
left behind, with a crescent search for rigor taking its place.
24 Axiomatization
   So the axiomatic method not only benefited from the development of
mathematics, but it also contributed to it. A new understanding of the
method lies at the roots of the rise in abstraction in mathematics from
the nineteenth century on. This ‘paradigm shift’ even gave rise to a
famous dispute between Frege and Hilbert on the nature of the axiomatic
method and its proper understanding (see [Bla.14]).
   But leaving disputes aside, the success of the axiomatic method was some-
thing to be explored further, and this was precisely what Hilbert proposed in
the turn of the twentieth century: the axiomatization of the theories of
physics, which had been carried out more or less by chance, as in the case
of Newton’s physics—which can be regarded as a kind of axiomatics —,7
was seen to be the next natural step of application of the method going
beyond mathematics. This proposal was famously advanced by David
Hilbert as the sixth of his celebrated list of 23 Problems of Mathematics, pre-
sented at the II International Congress of Mathematicians in 1900. There,
Hilbert stressed that

    whenever, from the side of the theory of knowledge or in geometry, or
    from the theories of natural or physical science, mathematical ideas
    come up, the problem arises for mathematical science to investigate
    the principles underlying these ideas and so to establish them upon a
    simple and complete system of axioms, that the exactness of the new
    ideas and their applicability to deduction shall be in no respect inferior
    to those of the old arithmetic concepts.
                                                               [Hilb.76, p.5]

And, later,

    [t]he investigation on the foundations of geometry suggest the problem:
    To treat in the same manner, by means of axioms, those physical sci-
    ences in which mathematics plays an important part; in the first rank
    are the theory of probability and mechanics.
                                                                (ibid., p.14)

  His ideas on this respect were already expressed some years before; in
1894, after discussing the role of the AM in geometry, he stressed that

    [n]ow also all other sciences are to be treated following the model of ge-
    ometry, first of all mechanics, but then also optics and electricity theory.
                                                       (quoted from [Sau.98])

   We will give examples of axiomatics in the sciences in chapter 5, but
here we just mention that during the twentieth century, much was done
in the directions pointed out by Hilbert not only in physics but also in
other disciplines, such as biology, initiated by John Woodger (See [All.38]
                                                         Axiomatization     25
but with several developments after him. See also [Will.70], [Jong.85],
[MagKra.01], [Esan.13], where further references can be found. For a
general setting in the beginnings of much of these applications, see the
papers presented in [Hen.et al.59].) As for the application of the AM in psy-
chology, see [Bog.79] for an account of Suppes’s works on the subject. But
the most investigated (from the axiomatic point of view) disciplines were
those of physics, such as classical particle mechanics [Sups.02], continuum
mechanics (see [Ign.96]), thermodynamics.
   Now, for a sharper illustration of the advance in the direction of crescent
rigor and abstraction on the development of the AM, we shall distinguish
among three levels of axiomatization. We notice in advance that this classi-
fication is not the only one possible; Hilbert distinguished between concrete
axiomatics and formal axiomatics [Hil.96]; Jean Ladrière went deeper by dis-
tinguishing among intuitive axiomatics, abstract axiomatics, formal axio-
matics, and pure formal systems [Lad.57, pp.36ff], but we think that our
three levels capture the distinctions we need. Our distinction will be as
follows: intuitive (or concrete) axiomatics, abstract axiomatics, and formal
axiomatics. Their meanings and examples are given in the next sections.


2.1    CONCRETE AXIOMATICS

In concrete axiomatic systems, which illustrate the way the Greeks used the
AM, the scientist has a well-defined field of knowledge or domain of appli-
cation in mind: the axiomatics is meant to reflect the logical structure of a
(supposedly) well-known domain. The basic concepts of the axiomatics are
already interpreted in that domain; the basic propositions are true of that
domain. Then the axiomatization aims at the organization of the field by
presenting in an organized fashion its basic concepts, basic assumptions
and all the possible results that can be derived from this basis. In his
paper “Axiomatic Thought”, Hilbert put things this way:

      When we assemble the facts of a definite, more-or-less comprehensive
      field of knowledge, we soon notice that these facts are capable of
      being ordered. This ordering always comes about with the help of a
      certain framework of concepts [Fachwerk von Begriffen] in the following
      way: a concept of this framework corresponds to each individual object
      of the field of knowledge, and a logical relation between concepts corre-
      sponds to every fact within the field of knowledge. The framework of
      concepts is nothing other than the theory of the field of knowledge.
                                                           [Hil.96, pp.1107–8]

   That is, by organizing a certain field of knowledge known in advance, we
enlighten its ‘frame of concepts’, which is, of course, a free choice of ours
(recall that Pieri had chosen an unusual class of primitive notions than
26 Axiomatization
those used in most formulations of Euclidean geometry). In this sense, axi-
omatization would not have much to do with the development of the frame-
work, strictly speaking, except for the new theorems that can be proved (but
for some critics, as we shall see later, these theorems are ‘already implicit’ in
the postulates, so nothing new would be introduced in the theory); it just
cleans the house. As we shall see later, this is a misconception.
   Besides Euclid’s axiomatics of geometry, typical examples of concrete ax-
iomatization include arithmetics (in the sense we will discuss in a few
moments), which deals with (natural) numbers and their operations, and Zer-
melo’s set theory, which axiomatizes the concept of set (collections of objects)
and objects that can be members of the sets. But let us begin with a simple
case, that of Patrick Suppes’s theory of human paternity just to emphasize
the technique [Sup.77]. Suppes had in mind a specific domain of application,
namely, human beings. His theory does not apply to either worms or plants
and can be summarized as follows. The primitive notions are alive human
being, male human being, and father of, which apply to two human beings
(other choices are possible, but here we follow Suppes).
   The postulates are

(P1) If the human being a is father of the human being b, then it is not the
  case that b is father of a.
(P2) All living human beings have only one father who is a male human
  being.
(P3) All living human beings have only one father who is not a male human
  being.

   The human being introduced by (P3) can be defined as mother of the
given human being. Other defined concepts are grandfather, brother,
sister, etc. Some theorems can be easily stated and proved: the father and
the mother of a given human being are different human beings; no
human being is the father of him or herself, and so on. It is important to
notice that, although the axiomatics can have other models, in a sense to
be made clear later, the intended domain is already given in advance. In
elaborating this theory, we already know (by hypothesis) the main traits
of human paternity theory.
   Intuitive Peano’s arithmetic is our second example. The domain of appli-
cation is composed by the natural numbers, which for us includes zero
(Peano started with 1). Supposedly, we know already what to do with
natural numbers, their main characteristics, and operations. Then we may
take as primitive notions the following: zero and sucessor (of a natural
number). Defined concepts are, for instance, one, two, three, prime
number, even number, and so on. The typical postulates are:

(PA1) Zero is not a successor. In other words, there is no natural number
  from which zero is a sucessor.
                                                          Axiomatization     27
(PA2) If two natural numbers have the same successor, they are the same
  natural number.
(PA3) If a certain property applies to natural numbers, then if zero has this
  property and whenever a natural number has the property it follows that
  its successor has it also, then all natural numbers have that property.

   This theory may also have other models (realizations of the axioms; the
concept of model is being used here informally, but will be considered
later); for instance, think of the same sequence of the (intuitive) natural
numbers, but now call ‘zero’ the number 100 and, as a sucessor of a
certain number n, the number n þ 100. Then it is clear that the axioms
are satisfied, and all other concepts and operations can be adapted to this
case. This would be a strange arithmetic to be used in a drugstore, but
from the mathematical point of view that doesn’t matter. The system, as
an interpreted calculus, works! As we have seen, the nature of the models
of a theory is something to be carefully analyzed.
   A third example of a concrete axiomatics is Zermelo’s set theory pre-
sented in 1908 [Zer.67]. Zermelo provided an axiomatic system for
Cantor’s theory of sets, seen as collections of objects. The very notion of
set was characterized by Cantor himself as follows:

    by an “aggregate” (Menge) we are to understand any collection into a
    whole (Zusammenfassung zu einein Ganzen) M of definite and separate
    objects m of our intuition or our thought.
                                           (our emphasis [Low.14, p.85])

   In other words, a set is a collection of objects of whatever sort with the
proviso that their elements are distinct from one another.8 We can form sets
of human beings, ants, angels, hurricanes, gods, prime numbers. But of
course Cantor was thinking (again!) of mathematics.9 However, as is well
known, the superb theory he created was inconsistent. The so-called para-
doxes of set theory clearly show this in a unequivocal way (a very clear dis-
cussion can be found in [FraBarLev.73]).
   To axiomatize set theory, Zermelo said that “[s]et theory is concerned
with a domain B of individuals, which we shall call simply objects, and
among which are the sets” [Zer.67]. Those individuals that are not sets
are the atoms (Urelemente in the German terminology). The fundamental
relation is that one which says a certain individual a is an element or
belongs to a set b; here we shall write a 2 b to use an updated notation.
This is the membership relation. As we shall see from the axiomatics, the
atoms may be elements of sets; hence, sets may have as elements either
atoms or other sets. Atoms do not have elements. Zermelo still introduces
the notion of subset: a set x is a subset of a set y if every element of x is an
element of y. In our updated terminology, we write x  y to express that.
Needless to say, we are not using Zermelo’s original terminology.
28 Axiomatization
   The aim of Zermelo’s axiomatization was to avoid some inconsistencies re-
sulting from the far too liberal notion of set used in Cantor’s informal theory.
However, in stating his postulates, Zermelo also did not fulfill all the logical
details. For instance, in his Separation Axiom (discussed later in this chapter),
the basis of his development, he used the rather vague notion of a definite
property in order to form sets from already given sets by ‘separating’ in the
given set those elements that fulfill the given property. It took some time
until Skolem and Fraenkel proposed to replace the notion of a ‘definite prop-
erty’ with a precise characterization, as we shall see later in this chapter.
   The postulates are as follows:

[Axiom of Extensionality] If two sets have the same elements, then they are
  the same set. In other words, given two sets x and y, if every element of x
  is an element of y and vice-versa then x ¼ y.

   This axiom makes it useless for a set to have repeat elements. If we write
{1, 2, 3} for the set comprising 1, 2, and 3 as its elements, then by force of
this axiom, it is identical to the set represented by {1, 1, 2, 3, 3, 3}, for they
have the same elements.

[Axiom of the Elementary Sets] There exists a (‘fictitious’, according to
  Zermelo) set, the null set that contains no element at all. Given an
  object a, either a set or an ur-element, there exists a set {a} containing
  just a as its element. Given objects a and b, there exists a set {a, b}
  whose only elements are a and b and nothing else.

  The set {a} is called the unitary of a and can be derived from {a, b} when a
¼ b. Hence it suffices to postulate the existence of the unordered pair {a, b}.
Uniqueness of the null set (or ‘empty set’ in modern language) can be
proved and it is denoted today by ;.

[Axiom (Scheme) of Separation] Whenever the formula F(x) (Zermelo
  spoke in terms of ‘propositional function’) is definite for all elements of
  a set x, then there is a subset y of x formed by precisely those elements
  of x that fulfill the condition F(x).

   As we have already stated, the notion of ‘definite property’ was not satis-
factorily clear. Today it is common to axiomatize set theory as a first-order
system, as we shall see in the next chapter. Then F(x) is a formula of a first-
order language with just one free variable, x. But, intuitively, the result is
the same: given a set x and a condition F, we can ‘separate’ from x those
elements that fulfill the condition and with them form another set y. This
trick is essential for avoiding the existence of enormous sets, which origi-
nate paradoxes in Cantor’s theory, for instance, the set of all sets or the
set of all those sets not belonging to themselves. So the whole domain B
                                                             Axiomatization      29
                                                 10
of sets and the Urelemente is also not a set. Zermelo’s axiom is really a
scheme, for it potentially originates an infinity of axioms, one for each
formula F we use.
    The notion of subset was mentioned already: a set x is a subset of a set y
if all elements of x are also elements of y. In today’s terminology, we write
x  y. Some basic properties are immediately obtained: (a) the empty set is
subset of any set, (b) every set is a subset of itself, (c) if x  y and y  x, then
x ¼ y and so on.

[Axiom of the Power Set] To every set x there corresponds a set PðxÞ, the
  power set of x, whose elements are the subsets of x.        S
[Axiom of Union] To every set x there corresponds a set termed (x) whose
  elements are the elements of the elements of x.

   If the set x has just two sets a and b as elements, then it is common today
to write a [ b to indicate the union of x.

[Axiom of Choice] If x is a set whose elements are also non-empty sets and
  pairwise disjoint sets, then there exists a set y having one and only one
  element in common with each element of x.
[Axiom of Infinity] There exists a set that contains the empty set and,
  having a as an element, has also {a} as an element.

   The natural numbers (Zermelo’s natural numbers) are defined (defined
concepts) as follows: 0 ≔ ;, 1 ≔ {0}, 2 ≔ {{0}} ¼ {1}, 3 ≔ {{{0}}} ¼ {{1}}
¼ {2}, etc. All set theory, including Cantor’s theories of transfinite ordinals
and cardinals, functions, orders, and so on can be developed from this ax-
iomatic basis.
   Again, we have here an axiomatics of a certain field known in advance,
namely, set theory. The theory just selects some collections to be sets so that
the known paradoxes do not arise.11
   Axiomatizations in the empirical sciences are in general concrete axio-
matics, for we are always thinking of an already known field of knowledge,
for instance Darwinian selection theory (see [Will.70]) or classical particle
mechanics [Sups.02], yet the resulting theories may have other ‘models’, as
we shall see later.
   It is important to realize that different axiomatizations of the same
domain are possible. Depending on the chosen primitive notions and
axioms we use, different versions of the theories can be achieved. The dis-
cussion of whether two different axiomatizations lead us to different theo-
ries was central in the traditional debate about the nature of scientific
theories (see again our chapter 1); here we assume that two different ver-
sions of group theory, say by choosing different primitive concepts or
axioms, are versions of the same theory. In the next section, we will
comment on this point a little bit more.
30 Axiomatization
2.2   ABSTRACT AXIOMATICS

A further step in the process of rigor in axiomatization appears with the rise
of abstract axiomatics. The reader should note that the three levels of axi-
omatic theories we are considering are different levels of abstraction. Ab-
stract axiomatic systems don’t have a fixed domain of discourse,
although in general there is a domain which motivates the development
of the axiomatics. So abstraction from a domain of application does not
entail that it has no preferred or intended domain. On the contrary, in
general, abstract axiomatics arise from the study of a certain field; in the
sense of concrete axiomatics, when the scientist realizes that it can have
other models, or domains of application, she develops her theory in such
a way that she may cope with all these domains at once. In this sense,
the axiomatic method is said to provide for an economy in thought.
    In the paper The architecture of mathematics [Bou.50], Bourbaki claims
that the rise of abstract axiomatics characterizes modern mathematics, for
the AM has the capacity of unifying fields that could, in principle, be seen as
distinct, so avoiding a ‘tower of Babel’ of disciplines. The infinitely many
groups, for instance, the infinitely many linear (or vector) spaces, the infi-
nitely many topological spaces, and so on can now be studied within a
unified framework, one for each category of mathematical object (groups,
linear spaces, topological spaces, etc.).
    Typical abstract axiomatic theories are those mentioned earlier as well as
algebraic rings, fields, and so on. Here the structural aspect of mathematics
appears for the first time in a clear way. For instance, group theory can be char-
acterized as the mathematical study of structures of the following kind:12 there
is a non-empty domain G and a binary operation  on G such that this oper-
ation is associative, admits a neutral element e, and every element a 2 G has an
inverse a 2 G relative to the operation, as we shall see in more detail later in
this chapter. Historical details about groups can be easily found in the litera-
ture, going back to the studies of zeros of certain polinomial equations. But
the very concept of group soon became abstract, in the sense that neither the
domain G nor the binary operation are specified, except for a particular appli-
cation. Groups are abstract mathematical structures of the form G ¼ hG; i.
We may find infinitely many structures that fulfill the definition, that is,
cases of groups. The theory of groups studies the mathematical properties of
these entities also in an abstract way. Also, group theory can be applied to
several domains beyond mathematics, such as physics; Hermann Weyl has pi-
oneered the use of groups in quantum mechanics.
    Just to make justice to what was said in the end of the last section about
different ways of axiomatizing a same field of knowledge, let us mention
that we can formulate the abstract notion of a group as follows: we take
a structure G ¼ hG; ; e; i comprising a non-empty set G and a binary op-
eration  defined on G as before, but now we add other primitive elements
to the structure, say a designated element e of G and an unary function 
                                                          Axiomatization     31
from G to G to form the inverse elements of the elements of G. Now it is
enough to adequately modify the axioms given. But the theory, here under-
stood as comprising all the results that can be obtained from these axio-
matics, is the same as before. Recall the thorny problems faced by the
semantic and syntactic approaches to theories when no such equivalence
between formulations is allowed.
   It is important to emphasize that in this kind of axiomatization, we do
not have a particular a priori intended domain of application. Linear
spaces, despite their motivations, have also infinitely many instantiations,
or models. For instance, Hilbert spaces, which are important in quantum
mechanics, are linear (vector) spaces of a kind.
   Concrete axiomatic systems can be transformed in abstract systems once
we ‘abstract’ the primitive notions of their intuitive meaning. This is a
natural move to abstraction and is precisely what the history of the
method tells us about its evolution. The rise of abstract mathematical struc-
tures was achieved precisely when mathematicians noticed that their concrete
axiomatics could be applied to other domains beyond the intended one.
   In abstract axiomatic systems, however, something is still kept in the
shadows implicitly assumed: the underlying logic. By logic, except when ex-
plicitly mentioned, we are being liberal so that it involves either higher-order
logics or set theory (we shall leave category theory out of this discussion).
Thus in presenting group theory, we are neither making explicit the mecha-
nisms we use to make deductions nor explaining that the binary operation 
is a mapping from the cartesian product G × G in G, that is, a set. The dif-
ferent ways of axiomatizing and their relations to traditional philosophical
approaches to scientific theories will be discussed in a later chapter.
   Our second example of abstract axiomatics is that of a Hilbert space, the
kind of theory we will need when considering quantum mechanics.13 In
short, a Hilbert space is a linear vector space with an inner product that is
complete in the norm defined by the inner product. Let us be more specific.
A linear (or vector) space is a structure of the form E ¼ hV; K; þ; i, where

  (1) V is a non-empty set whose elements are called vectors. This name has
      its origins in the intended model of linear spaces, namely, that where
      the vectors are geometric vectors (sometimes also called Euclidean
      vectors — that is, quantities having a length and a direction, fre-
      quently used in physics and in vector algebra). We shall use small
      Greek letters such as α, β, . . . for denoting vectors.
  (2) K is a field, which by itself comprises other elements; K is by itself a
      mathematical structure K ¼ hK; þK ; K i obeying the postulates of
      fields. In most applications to physics, K is taken to be either the
      field of the real numbers or the field of complex numbers, with the
      last one being the most relevant for quantum mechanics. The ele-
      ments of the domain K of the field are called scalars and denoted
      by small Latin letters a, b, x, y, . . . , sometimes with indexes.
32 Axiomatization
  (3) þ is an application14 from V × V to V, called vector addition. The
       image of the pair hα, βi is written αþβ and called the sum of the
       vectors α and β. It is postulated that hV; þi is a commutative group
       whose neutral element is called the null vector, denoted by O. The
       inverse of α in this group is written α.
  (4)  is an application from K  V in V, called product of a vector by a
       scalar. The image of the pair hx, αi is written x  α or just xα. In
       physics, usually this is also written α  x or just αx by an abuse of lan-
       guage. It is postulated that this operation satisfies the following
       axioms, for any a; b 2 V, and x, y 2 K:
      (a) x(α þ β) ¼ xα þ xβ
      (b) (x þK y)α ¼ xα þ yα
      (c) (x K y)α ¼ x(yα)
      (d) 1α ¼ α, where 1 is the neutral multiplicative element of the field K

   Later we shall speak of particular linear spaces (or of ‘models’ of this
structure). We shall proceed here as does the standard mathematician. By
an abuse of language, we follow the standard terminology and say that
W is a linear (or a vector) space over the field K. When K ¼ R — that is,
the field is the field of real numbers — we speak of real linear spaces and
in complex linear spaces when K ¼ C.

Definition 2.2.1 (RESTRICTION OF AN OPERATION) Let X be a set and  a
binary operation on X. Denoting as usual by a  b the image of the pair
ha, bi 2 X × X by the mapping , let Y  X. We call the restriction of the
operation  to Y, denoted Y the operation defined by a Y b iff a  b and
a, b 2 Y.
   In other words, it is ‘the same’ operation but now considered only in re-
lation to the elements of the subset Y. It is easy to extend this definition to
most general cases as those used in the next definition.

Definition 2.2.2 (SUBSPACE) A structure E 0 ¼ hW; K; þW ; W i is a subspace of
the linear space E ¼ hV; K; þ; i if W  V and þW and W are the restrictions
of the operations of E to the sets in E 0 , they are also a linear space over the
same field K.
   The usual parlance in mathematics does not distinguish between the no-
tations of the operations and their restrictions, leaving this distiction to the
context.
   In order to obtain a Hilbert space in which we may develop quantum
mechanics, we fix a complex linear space (henceforth K ¼ C) and enlarge
the structure with an additional operation called an inner product, which
is a mapping now from V  V to C. The image of the pair hα, βi will be
denoted by hα|βi. We call attention to the differences of notation: hα, βi
is an ordered pair of vectors, while hα|βi is a scalar (a complex number).
                                                          Axiomatization      33
The postulates to be satisfied by this new notion are the following ones,
holding for all vectors and scalars:

  (a) hα|β þ γi ¼ hα|βi þK hα|γi
  (b) hα|xβi ¼ x K hα|βi
  (c) hα|βi ¼ hβ|αi*, where the exponentiation * indicates the complex
      conjugation (remembering that is z ¼ a þ bi, then z* ¼ a  bi)
  (d) hα|αi 0 and hα|αi ¼ 0 iff α ¼ O

  Then we introduce the following definition:

Definition 2.2.3 (NORM) If a 2 V, the norm induced by the inner product of
the vector α, denoted kαk, follows:
              pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
    k a k:¼    hajai:

   It results that the norm of a vector is a real number. This norm is said to
be the norm induced by the inner product.15 With this notion, the concept
of distance between two vectors α and β can be defined as follows:

Definition 2.2.4 (DISTANCE) The distance between α and β, denoted dða; bÞ,
is given by

    dða; bÞ :¼ k a þ  b k ¼ k a  b k :

   We just remark that, concerning the vector β, the following identity can
be easily checked: β ¼ (1)β. Let α1, α2, . . . be a sequence of vectors in V
(denoted by (αi)), and let β be a vector in V. Then

Definition 2.2.5 (CONVERGENCE) We say that the sequence (αi) converges to β
iff for any real number ε > 0, there exists a natural number n such that for
any j > n, dðaj ; bÞ < ε.

Definition 2.2.6 (CAUCHY SEQUENCE) A sequence (αi) of vectors is a Cauchy
sequence if for any real number ε > 0 there exists a natural number n such
that for any j, k > n, we have that kαj  αkk < ε.

   Every Cauchy sequence converges, as it can be proved. The problem is
that if we suppose a collection of vectors of V and assume that all vectors
of the sequence are in this set, the vector to which it converges may not
be in this set. In particular, this set of vectors, endowed with the restrictions
of the linear space operations, may also be a linear space. In this case, we
say that the corresponding structure is a subspace of the given linear
space. Then we have the main definition:
34 Axiomatization
Definition 2.2.7 (HILBERT SPACE) A Hilbert space is a linear space with an
inner product such that all Cauchy sequences of vectors converge to a
vector still in the space.
    A subspace of V that obeys this condition is termed a closed subspace.
The Hilbert spaces are the mathematical frameworks used in the most
usual formulations of non-relativistic quantum mechanics (see the formula-
tion of quantum mechanics in chapter 5).
    Beyond the particular examples developed, which are useful for the dis-
cussions to come, the important thing at this point is to note that the math-
ematical structures being obtained (groups, linear spaces, Hilbert spaces)
are abstract in the sense of our characterization. They don’t have a partic-
ular domain being supposed in advance. But the formulations are still sup-
posing the use of concepts such as mappings, sets, and so on, and the proofs
(if we would provide some) assume an implicit underlying logic. So we need
to go further.



2.3   FORMAL AXIOMATICS

Formal axiomatic theories go deeper in abstraction and rigor by making the
underlying logic totally explicit and, in general, by using formal languages to
express the propositions of the theory. Being explicit about the logic is really
necessary, mainly because the logic employed could not be standard (classi-
cal) logic. The relevance of making logic explicit became clear during the
last century when several deep metamathematical results where achieved.
Gödel’s incompleteness theorems, Tarski’s theorem on the undefinability of
the notion of truth, the existence of non-standard models of Peano’s arithme-
tics, the independence proofs in set theory, and much more were possible only
after the full understanding of the logic underlying classical mathematical the-
ories was achieved. In particular, the rise of non-classical logics was possible
only after logic achieved total formalization so that several other systems
could be developed either by extending it (‘complimentary logics’) or by mod-
ifying some of its basic laws (‘heterodox logics’). On what concerns empirical
sciences, it is still a challenge to convincingly argue that physics, for instance,
really needs a non-classical logic. We shall return to this point later.
   For the moment, let us present here the main systems we shall be dealing
with in this book as examples of formal axiomatics. The systems to be pre-
sented are all ‘classical’, that is, grounded on classical first-order logic, so let
us present it first. By doing so, we keep the text self-contained.


2.3.1 First-Order Classical Logic With Identity
This logic, let us call it L1 , will be presented through the ‘linguistic’ ap-
proach16 by describing a basic vocabulary, rules of formation (the
                                                             Axiomatization       35
                         1
grammatical part of L ), and its postulates. Let us call the language L. The
basic (primitive) vocabulary of L comprises the following categories of
primitive symbols (as is common in these presentations, we do not distin-
guish between use and mention):

   1. The propositional connectives: : and !.
   2. A denumerable collection of individual variables: x0, x1, x2, . . .. We
      shall use x, y, z, . . . as metavariables for individual variables.
   3. The universal quantifier: 8.
   4. Auxiliary symbols: left and right parentheses and the comma.
   5. A collection (possibly empty) of individual constants: a1, a2, . . .. We
      use a, b, c . . . as metavariables for individual constants.
   6. For any natural number n > 0, a collection of predicate symbols of
      rank n: Pn1 ; Pn2 ; . . .. We use F, P, Q, . . . as metavariables for predicate
      symbols, and the context will indicate their rank.
   7. For any natural number n > 0, a collection of functional symbols
      (symbols for operations) of rank n: f1n ; f2n ; . . .. We use f, g, h, . . . as
      metavariables for operations.
   8. The identity symbol: =.

   The symbols in 5, 6, and 7 are called specific or non-logical symbols and
depend on the theory having L1 as underlying logic, as we shall see in the
examples that follow. The other symbols are the logical symbols and can
be taken as being the same for all theories.17
   The grammar is described as follows: first, we define the expressions of L
as sequences of finite symbols of L written horizontally from left to right.
For instance, :ððx1 x2 ! A34 ð8 is an expression.

Definition 2.3.1 (TERMS OF L) The terms of the language are the individual
variables, the individual constants, and the expressions of the form f(t1, . . . ,
tn), where f is a functional symbol of rank n and t1, . . . , tn are n terms.
These are the only terms.

Definition 2.3.2 (FORMULAS) The formulas of L (well-formed expressions)
are defined by the following clauses: (1) If t1 and t2 are terms, then t1 ¼
t2 is a formula called ‘atomic’. (2) If F is a predicate symbol of rank n
and t1, . . . , tn are terms, then F(t1, . . . , tn) is a formula (also ‘atomic’).
(3) If α and β are formulas, then expressions such as (:α) and (α ! β)
are formulas. (4) If x is an individual variable and α is a formula, then
8xα is a formula. These are the only formulas of L.

   In writing formulas, we make a standard convention for elimination of pa-
rentheses: for instance, we can eliminate the external parentheses in writing
formulas. So :α abbreviates (:α) and α ! β abbreviates (α ! β). Parentheses
are useful for avoiding ambiguities in writing formulas. Notice that α and β
are also metavariables for formulas. Symbols like these (Greek lowercase
36 Axiomatization
letters) will be used; thus the expressions we shall call ‘axioms’ are in reality
axiom schemata, which enable us to obtain axioms when uniform substitu-
tions of formulas for these metavariables are performed.
    Some additional syntactical definitions and conventions are in order to fa-
cilitate the exposition. An occurrence of a variable x in a formula is bound if
x is the variable that appears just after the universal quantifier or if it occurs
in a formula that is affected by (is in the scope of) the quantifier. Otherwise, it
has a free occurrence in the formula. For instance, in the formula 8x(x ¼ y)
! 8y(x ¼ y), the two first occurrences of x are bound and the third one is
free, while the first occurrence of y is free and the last two are bound. If a
formula α has xi1, . . ., xik among its free variables, we write α(xi1, . . . , xik).
So α(x) stands for a formula that has free occurrences of x.
    A term t is free for the variable x in the formula α if no free occurrence of
x in the formula α lies within the scope of a quantifier 8y, where y is a var-
iable occurring in t. For instance, if f is a functional symbol of rank 2, then f
(x, y) is free for x in the formula 8z(x ¼ z) ! (x ¼ w), but is not free for x in
:8y:(x ¼ z) ! (x ¼ w).18
    The postulates of L1 are

(L1) α ! (β ! α)
(L2) (α ! (β ! γ)) ! ((α ! β) ! (α ! γ))
(L3) (:α ! :β) ! ((:α ! β) ! α)
(L4) 8xα(x) ! α(t), where t is a term free for x in α(x)
(L5) 8x(α ! β) ! (α ! 8xβ), provided that α does not contain free occur-
     rences of x
(L6) 8x(x ¼ x)
(L7) x ¼ y ! (α(x) ! α(y)), where α(y) arises from α(x) by replacing some
     free occurrences of x by y

   Furthermore, our system comprises the following inference rules, where
‘ is the symbol of deduction:

(MP) (Modus Ponens) α ! β, α ‘ β
(Gen) (Generalization) α ‘ 8xα

    The notion of deduction is crucial in characterizing a logic. If we modify
it, we change the logic. The standard definition is the following one, where
Γ denotes a set of formulas:

Definition 2.3.3 (DEDUCTION) We say that a formula α is deduced, derived,
and inferred from a set Γ of formulas (the premises of the deduction) if the
following clauses are obeyed:

   (i) There is a sequence of formulas β1, β2, . . . , βn such that
  (ii) βn is α
                                                         Axiomatization     37
  (iii) Each βi (i < n) of the sequence is either
(a) an axiom, or
(b) an element of Γ, or
(c) immediate consequence, by one of the rules of inference, of preceding
     formulas in the sequence

  If these clauses are fulfilled, we write
    G‘a

  There are situations in which Γ ¼ ;; that is, there are no premises in the
deduction other than the axioms of the logic. In this case, we write
    ‘a

and say that α is a thesis or a formal theorem of the logic.
  Further useful definitions are

Definition 2.3.4 (OTHER CONNECTIVES AND THE EXISTENTIAL QUANTIFIER)
Taking into account our conventions for the use of parentheses, we put

   (i) α ^ β ≔ :(α ! :β)
  (ii) α _ β ≔ :α ! β
 (iii) α $ β ≔ (α ! β) ^ (β ! α)
 (iv) 9xα ≔ :8x:α

    We get a first-order theory when we specify a particular choice of the so-
called non-logical symbols, namely, individual constants, predicate
symbols, and functional symbols and add further specific axioms (or
proper axioms) for the particular theory. Thus the axioms (or postulates)
of a first-order theory will be those of L1 plus those of the specific
theory. In this sense, L1 is by itself a first-order theory, with no additional
proper postulates.
    For instance, we can formulate Suppes’s theory of human paternity as a
first-order theory as follows. We assume all the logical vocabulary given
earlier of a first-order logic and consider the following specific primitive
symbols: a binary predicate P and two unary predicates L and M. The
only terms are the individual variables x, y, z, . . .. The atomic formulas
are x ¼ y and the expressions of the form P(x, y), L(x), and M(x). The in-
tended interpretation of these formulas is obvious: x is a father of y, x is a
living human being, and x is a male human being. The postulates, in addi-
tion to those given earlier, may be written as follows:

(P1) 8x8y(P(x, y) ! :P(y, x))
(P2) 8x(L(x) ! 9!y(M(y) ^ P(y, x)))
(P3) 8x(L(x) ! 9!y(:M(y) ^ P(y, x)))
38 Axiomatization
  Here 9!x means ‘there exists just one x’.
  The next example of a first-order theory is Peano’s arithmetics. We
abbreviate :(t1 ¼ t2) by t1 6¼ t2.


2.3.2 Peano Arithmetics
The underlying logical apparatus of the theory PA is the one presented
earlier. We maintain the same logical symbols, but the specific symbols
are the following: (1) an individual constant ‘0’, (2) a unary functional
symbol ‘σ’, and (3) two binary functional symbols          and . Hence,
besides the individual variables, the terms of the language of PA are ob-
tained from expressions such as 0, σt where t is a term, t1    t2 and t1
t2, for t1 and t2 any terms.
    The postulates of PA are (L1)–(L7) plus the following:

(PA1) 8x(0 6¼ σx)
(PA2) 8x8y(σx ¼ σy ! x ¼ y)
(PA3) If α(x) is a formula with just x free, then
       að0Þ ^ 8xðaðxÞ ! aðxÞÞ ! 8xaðxÞ

(PA4) 8x(0 x ¼ x)
(PA5) 8x8y(x σy ¼ σ(x          y))
(PA6) 8x(0 x ¼ 0)
(PA7) 8x8y(x σy ¼ σ(x          y)    x)

   The reader may easily note that (PA1)–(PA3) are possible formalizations
of those axioms informally stated earlier. The additional postulates are nec-
essary because we don’t have in the theory the resources to prove that the
functions representing the operations      and    can be defined (which re-
quires the so-called Theorem of Recursion—see [End.77]). In short, with
the help of this axiom, we can prove that the functions that define addition
and multiplication exist and are unique. But, in first-order, logic this proof
is not possible. According to Edmund Landau, this fact was observed for
the first time by Grandjot [Lan.66, p.ix].
   Let us give an example of a proof that will show the differences between
the ways we usually proceed in abstract and in formal axiomatics. In group
theory, we can prove the following theorem, known as the cut rule,19 which
can be stated in group theory as a theorem:

Theorem 2.3.1 (Cut Rule) In every group G ¼ hG; i, for all elements a, b, c
2 G, we have that c  a ¼ c  b entails a ¼ b.
  Proof: (Informal) Let us suppose c  a ¼ c  b. Since every element of G
has an inverse still in G, then c has an inverse c0 . So we can write c0  (c  a)
¼ c0  (c  b) once we can operate any two elements of G (in fact, c0 , c  a,
                                                             Axiomatization      39
and c  b are elements of G, so they can be operated—but note the lack of
something here: How do we know that in writing c0 before both terms in the
equality that the equality still remains? This can be seen only with the re-
sources of logic that follow). By the associative axiom, this last expression
is equivalent to (c0  c)  a ¼ (c0  c)  b). But, since c0 is the inverse of c, it
results from the last equality that e  a ¼ e  b. So using the axiom of the
neutral element, we get a ¼ b.&

   Now we present a detailed (and also boring) proof with all logical
details. The main logical results to be used are the reflexive law of identity
L6, namely, 8x(x ¼ x), the substitutive law of identity L7 — that is, x ¼ y
! (α(x) ! α(y)), where α(x) is a formula with a free occurrence of x and α
(y) is obtained from α(x) by the substitution of y in some free occurrences of
x and the inference rule Modus Ponens (MP). The proof goes as follows:

Theorem 2.3.2 (CUT RULE) In every group G, for all elements a, b, c 2 G, we
have that c  a ¼ c  b entails a ¼ b.
  Proof: (logic; in the right, we mention the used postulates)

  1. c  a ¼ c  b (Assumption)
  2. (c  a ¼ c  b) ! ((c0 (c  a) ¼ c0 (c  a)) ! (c0 (c  a) ¼ c0 (c  b)))
     (1, L7), with α(a) being (c0  (c  a) ¼ c0  (c  a))
  3. c0 (c  a) ¼ c0 (c  a) (L6)
  4. (c  a ¼ c  b) ! (c0  (c  a) ¼ c0  (c  b))) (2, 3, propositional logic
     and MP, that is, the tautology (α ! (α ! β) ! (α ! β)))
  5. c0  (c  a) ¼ c0  (c  b) (1, 4, MP)
  6. (c0  c)  a ¼ (c0  c)  b (5, G1)
  7. c0  c ¼ e (G3)
  8. (c0  c ¼ e) ! (((c0  c)  a ¼ (c0  c)  b) ! (e  a ¼ e  b)) (7, L7)
  9. (((c0  c)  a ¼ (c0  c)  b) ! (e  a ¼ e  b) (7,8, MP)
 10. e  a ¼ e  b (6,9, MP)
 11. e  a ¼ a (G2)
 12. e  b ¼ b (G2)
 13. (e  a ¼ a) ! ((e  a ¼ e  b) ! (a ¼ b)) (11, L7)
 14. (e  a ¼ e  b) ! (a ¼ e  b) (12, 13, MP)
 15. a ¼ e  b (10,14, MP)
 16. (e  b ¼ b) ! ((a ¼ e  b) ! (a ¼ b)) (15, L7)
 17. a ¼ e  b ! a ¼ b (12, 15, MP)
 18. a ¼ b (15, 17, MP)&

   The differences between informal (that is, not making the logical steps ex-
plicit) and formal proofs was discussed by Patrick Suppes in a very interesting
and important chapter of his book [Sups.57, chap.7]. It is important to note
that it would be practically impossible to present all mathematical deductions
this way; for instance, in their masterpiece Principia Mathematica, Whitehead
40 Axiomatization
and Russell present the proof that 1 þ 1 ¼ 2 on page 379! [WhiRus.10]. The
amount of previously required definitions and proofs is overwhelmingly big.
Anyway, it is beyond doubt that the logical analysis of mathematical proofs is
important, so Proof Theory, the part of logic that deals precisely with this
kind of analysis, is one of the fundamental subjects of modern logic. What
is relevant here is that the aforementioned theorem does not hold only in a
particular group, but it is valid for every group. This generalization is one
of the main traits of AM, that is, the possibility of treating different fields
of knowledge at once. What holds as a theorem for group theory holds for
all groups, and the same can be said of all other abstract axiomatic systems.
    Furthermore, without the development of modern logic and the full
knowledge of the abstract and formal axiomatic systems, we could not
arrive at strong results such as Gödel’s, Tarski’s, and others, like the indepen-
dence of axioms in set theory which, as an example, gave us the possibility of
finding alternative (‘non-cantorian’, in Cohen’s words) mathematics. Thus
the axiomatic method does involve heuristics. But this is a challenge for
chapter 4. Before doing that, let us discuss a specific formal theory which
shall have great relevance for our discussion on axiomatization and
models: elementary set theory.




NOTES

    1. Árpád Szabó attempts to understand why and how the transformation of
       mathematics into a discipline grounded in axioms and proofs takes place;
       see his mentioned works plus [Sza.78]. Patrick Suppes, on the other hand,
       in speaking about the origins of the axiomatic method, attributes it to
       Eudoxus in the fourth century BC [Sups.02, p.35], but we prefer to follow
       the (apparently) historically more detailed analysis developed by Szabó.
    2. Today we no longer distinguish between axioms (anciently called common
       assumptions, valid for all sciences) and postulates (basic propositions of
       the specific science under investigation).
    3. The proposition proposes to construct an equilateral triangle on a given
       segment. But the ‘proof’ uses a fact neither assumed nor proven before,
       namely, that two circles that appear in the proof intersect one another
       [Eucl.08].
    4. A wonderful analysis of the origins of Greek mathematics is the book The
       Beginnings of Greek Mathematics by Árpád Szabó [Sza.78] as well as his
       mentioned papers.
    5. According to Szabó, Aristotle did not believe that the fundamental principles
       of mathematics—that is, geometry—could be chosen arbitrarily, but that
       there would be “simple and natural starting point for mathematics”
       [Sza.78, p.227], [JonBet.10].
    6. His axiomatics preceded Hilbert’s by several months. The set of motions was
       characterized as a group of transformations acting on the set of points. See
       [Mar.93].
    7. In fact, Newton’s three laws can be taken as axioms of his system. But no
       explicit mention to axiomatization was made in his work.
                                                               Axiomatization       41
 8. There is a theory of multisets that enables ‘sets’ to have repeated elements
    [Bli.88]. There are also the quasi-sets whose elements may be indiscernible
    [FreKra.06].
 9. For a good history of set theory, see [Dau.90].
10. This should be qualified, for it will be important for us latter. The domain
    (so as the universe and many other collections) are not Zermelo-sets, that
    is, sets in Zermelo’s theory—supposed consistent—but nothing excludes
    that they can be sets of another set theory. The notion of set is not absolute,
    and depends on the theory we use.
11. For these ‘known paradoxes’, the reader may have a look at the introduction
    of [Men.97] and also in [FraBarLev.73].
12. The notion of structure shall be introduced precisely later. For now, let us
    take it intuitively as comprising a set or some sets and operations and rela-
    tions over the elements of these sets, plus some distinguished elements—not
    all these objects may be present in every structure, of course.
13. Truly, there are formulations that do not use Hilbert spaces; see [Sty.02].
14. Here we are taking the words ‘application’, ‘function’, and ‘mapping’ as
    synonymous.
15. Generally speaking, a norm on a linear space is a mapping k k from V in C,
    which associates to any vector α a scalar kαk such that, for any vectors α and
    β and scalar x, we have (a) kαk 0 and kαk ¼ 0 iff a ¼ O, (b) kxαk ¼ |x|kαk,
    where |x| is the modulus of x and (c) kα þ βk  kαk þ kβk. There are several
    different norms over a linear space, but we are interested in the one given by
    the aforementioned definition.
                            pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ A further remark: if x is a complex number x
    ¼ a þ bi, then jxj ¼ a2 þ b2 . The reader should notice that in the defini-
    tions given in this note, we are not making explicit differences between
    the operations among vectors and among scalars; by the way, this is the stan-
    dard procedure we shall pursue from now on.
16. An alternative approach would be ‘algebraic’, seeing a logic as an ordered
    pair (an algebra) L ¼ hF; ‘i, where F is a set whose objects are called formu-
    las and ‘ is a function from PðFÞ to F, the deduction operation, satisfying
    well-known postulates.
17. Of course there are here also different ways of formulating L1 , say by choos-
    ing a distinct set of logical symbols, but we shall omit the details.
18. This example is adapted from [Men.97, p.69], where further details and ex-
    amples can be found.
19. Don’t confuse with Gentzen’s cut rule!
3       A Mathematical Background




We shall now outline a mathematical framework where the formal counter-
part of scientific theories can be discussed—namely, the Zermelo–Fraenkel
set theory, ZF, perhaps with the Axiom of Choice, ZFC. Since the relevance
of this subject is in general not well known by the general philosopher of
science, we will provide further explanations about the details of the
theory in hopes that they will help the reader to agree with us on the impor-
tance of this kind of study to our subject.
   We write ZF(C) to refer to both of the mentioned theories; when a dis-
tinction between these theories is required, we shall make explicit reference.
Of course, other frameworks could be used instead; there are many options
for expressing at least part of present-day mathematics, such as higher-
order logics, as in Carnap [Car.58] (with some examples of empirical the-
ories) or category theory [Ger.85].
   For the sake of simplicity, and to follow common usage, we have chosen
to treat ZF(C) as a first-order theory, and its language, presented in section
3.2, will be called L2 .1 But before describing ZF(C), it will be profitable to
discuss a little bit about the construction of axiomatic/formal systems.


3.1    THE PRINCIPLE OF CONSTRUCTIVITY

In his book Ensaio sobre os Fundamentos da Lógica,2 da Costa calls the fol-
lowing methodological rule ‘the Principle of Constructivity’:

      The whole exercise of reason presupposes that it has a certain intuitive
      ability of constructive idealization, whose regularities are systematized
      by intuitionistic arithmetics, with the inclusion of its underlying logic.
                                                                 [Cos.80, p.57]

   What does he mean by that? The explanations appeared earlier in his
book, and we base our explanation on his ideas, with the risk of not being
able to do justice to much of the rich and clear contents of the book. In
this section, when we make reference to a certain page only (say, by
                                            A Mathematical Background         43
writing ‘page 51’), it refers to the mentioned book by da Costa. To speak a
little bit of such matters is of course quite important, for we intend to present
a formal system (ZF) using expressions such as ‘infinite set of individual var-
iables’, for instance, which presuppose a previous notion of the concept of
‘infinity’; hence the construction of set theory as a formal theory apparently
presupposes at least part of the very mathematics it intends to ground.
    But let us pay close attention to da Costa:

    Formal disciplines are essentially discursive. But the discourse develops
    itself in different levels, and each one of them must be understood, or
    intuited, as already noticed by Descartes. Even if one reasons symboli-
    cally and formally, the different elementary steps of the evolution of the
    discourse need to be clear and evident, for in the contrary there would
    be no reasoning, and one would not know what she is doing.
                                                                       (p.50)

    In trying to systematize the empirical reality, we make use of our capacity
of reasoning. We use intuition and other resources, such as previously learned
theories, personal experiences, memory, imagination, expertise, and insights.
In a certain sense, the present-day stage of the evolution of science is a result
of not only our biological and cultural characteristics but also of the previous
theories and scientific background. But even intuition is not enough. We need
to systematize our intuitions, and in mathematics, the axiomatic method
became the (apparently) best methodological tool, being extended to empir-
ical science, as we have already seen. Well-developed sciences, or disciplines,
even though they are not completely axiomatized or formalized yet, can be
treated, from a mathematical perspective, in the same way as the formal sci-
ences, being also essentially discursive. In other words, scientific knowledge,
being essentially conceptual knowledge, needs discourse, and our ‘discourse’
needs language and symbolism (p.35) and, we can add, our inferences depend
on logic.3
    In a certain sense, we may say that our knowledge of a certain scientific
domain is given by means of the elaboration of structures; we ‘structure’ the
domain by gathering concepts, which may be relations and operations over
a certain domain (or domains) of objects we are interested in. Even if we do
it only informally, in reality, we are elaborating structures that concentrate
what we think are the basic concepts we intend to use in our approach (we
have already said something on this respect in the preface). Certainly, dif-
ferent scientists can choose different concepts. Then we can work ‘infor-
mally’ by providing the relevant definitions and theorems, or more
formally by providing to these concepts suitable (even if informally
stated) postulates we think may govern them with respect to our intended
domain(s). Thus we may say that our scientific knowledge is conceptual
and structural. Sometimes these ‘postulates’ are not even formulated explic-
itly. There are examples in mathematics (and much more in the empirical
44 A Mathematical Background
sciences) where a certain field is not presented axiomatically in the sense de-
scribed earlier. For instance, consider analytic geometry as presented in a
first undergraduate course. It has no axioms, properly speaking. The
same happens to differential and integral calculus. These disciplines are de-
veloped from definitions to theorems. But, as Alonso Church has made
clear, every axiomatic theory can be transformed into a ‘definitional’
theory, comprising just definitions and theorems. Thus, in a certain sense,
both analytic geometry and differential calculus can be seen as ‘axiomatic’
too.
    Going back to the point under discussion, we recall, as is well known,
that in intuitionistic mathematics, we have an intuitive ‘visualization’ of
the entities that interest us (p.50). This is essentially an intellectual
intuition—an expression that intends to capture the idea that

    there cannot be immediate and evident knowledge without contempla-
    tion, without a look to the objects that interest us or, at least, of the
    conceptual relations which define them; in an analogous way, there is
    no intellectual contemplation which does not enable us to formulate
    direct judgments, linked to different levels of evidence.
                                                                       (p.51)

    The reference to intuitionistic mathematics is grounded on the fact that,
according to da Costa, it provides an intuitive ‘visualization’ of the entities
that interest us (p.52), contrarily to standard mathematics, where such an
intuition does not need to be available (p.54). He illustrates the issues
with examples of the following kind: we have no clear ‘vision’ either of
transfinite cardinals or of the totality of the real numbers, but only an intu-
ition of the system of relations that implicitly define these concepts by
means of axiomatic systems (p.54). This ‘intuitive visualization’ provides
us with an intuitive pragmatic nucleus, and we may say that, based on
this nucleus, we articulate a kind of algebra (da Costa doesn’t use this
word in this context) that enables us to compose them, operate with
them, and so on, going to more sophisticated and sometimes not intuitively
evident conceptualizations. This way, we go out of the intuitive nucleus,
and in flying so high, the axiomatic method is our ‘autopilot’, which
enables us to fly in domains where our intuitions do not help us much.4
    In this sense, we begin by describing a formal system using this intuitive
nucleus of finitist and constructive nature; as da Costa says, “it is today uni-
versally accepted that there cannot be formalized arithmetics without
intuitive arithmetics” (p.57). It is this informal and intuitive handling of
symbols and concepts that, at first glance, enable us to make reference to
the tools we need to characterize our axiomatic/formalized theories. Thus
it is in this sense that we formulate the language of ZF(C) described in
the next section; in saying, for instance, that we have a denumerable infinite
collection of individual variables, we could say that our language
                                            A Mathematical Background         45
encompasses two symbols, x and 0 , and the variables would be expressions
of the form x, x0 , x00 , . . . , and the same for the individual constants. This
way, we avoid speaking of idealized concepts (in Hilbert’s sense, such as
‘denumerable many’) and keep ourselves in a constructive setting. Interest-
ing as it is, we had enough for this kind of discussion.
   It is interesting that similar ideas are also advanced by Kenneth Kunen in
his book The Foundations of Mathematics [Kun.09], which refer specifi-
cally to logic. Speaking about how set theory is developed, Kunen says that

      [y]ou don’t need any knowledge about infinite sets; you could learn about
      these as the axioms are being developed; but you do need to have some
      basic understanding of finite combinatorics even to understand what
      statements are and are not axioms. [. . .] This basic finitistic reasoning,
      which we do not analyze formally, is called the metatheory. In this
      metatheory, we explain various notions such as what a formula is and
      which formulas are axioms of our formal theory, which here is ZFC.
                                                            [Kun.09, pp.28–9]

   We can interpret these words as indicating that we start with intuitive
notions necessary, say, to distinguish between two different symbols
(such as a and b). So we are presupposing things like the intuitive
meaning of the number two as the idea of ‘different’ things. Then we
start to combine these symbols in a way that enables us to elaborate sophis-
ticated mathematical languages, such as that of ZF(C). Then, in a second
stage, we work inside ZF(C) and, with its tools, we can reconstruct the
steps we have gone through previously only at an informal level and, in par-
ticular, explain rigorously what two may be taken to be. In this sense, as
says Kunen, “formal logic must be developed twice” (ibid., p.191).
   The metatheory, of course, can also be treated formally, but in order to
do that we would need to have available once again, as a prerequisite, an
informal metametatheory and so on. But let us turn now to ZF and ZFC
set theories.


3.2    THE ZF(C) SET THEORIES

Here we shall present two theories, ZF and ZFC. Some redundancies can be
found by the reader with things already exposed before. But our aim is to
keep this chapter independent, as it were, so we shall not bother with
these repetitions. The reader should not be confused by the terminology:
ZF is the first-order Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory without the Axiom of
Choice, while ZFC is the theory obtained from ZF by adding to it the
Axiom of Choice. The underlying formal language is the same for both the-
ories, and they differ just by the mentioned axiom, so most of the develop-
ments may be carried on for both theories alike, with the relevant
46 A Mathematical Background
differences being mentioned when necessary. Important to note, as stated
by Gödel and Cohen, the Axiom of Choice can be neither proved nor dis-
proved from the axioms of ZF (supposed consistent).
   The language L2 of ‘pure’ ZF(C) (that is, not comprising Urelemente)
has the following categories of primitive symbols:

   (i) The propositional connectives: : and !
  (ii) The universal quantifier: 8
 (iii) Two binary predicates : ¼ and 2
 (iv) Auxiliary symbols: left and right parentheses: ( and )
  (v) A denumerable infinite set of individual variables: x1, x2, . . ., which in
       the metalanguage we will denote (provided that there is no risk of
       ambiguity) by x, y, z, w, u, v, etc.

   The language L2 is a denumerable language (its primitive symbols, given
in the list presented earlier, can be enumerated) and its syntax, to be intro-
duced now, is recursive, which intuitively means that we can program a
computer to recognize whether a finite sequence of primitive symbols is a
formula in the sense defined in the following section. First, let us say that
the only terms of this language are the individual variables.

Definition 3.2.1 (FORMULAS) The class of formulas is defined recursively as
follows:

   (i) If x and y are individual variables, then expressions of the form x 2 y
       and x ¼ y are atomic formulas.
  (ii) If α and β are formulas, so are all expressions of the form :α, (α ! β)
       and 8xα, where x is an individual variable.
 (iii) There are no other formulas.

   Frequently, we omit parentheses when the reading does not lead to am-
biguity, and we reintroduce them in order to avoid ambiguity, according to
standard conventions (see [Men.97]). We remark that α, β, and other
symbols not listed earlier do not make up part of the basic language; they
may be seen as metavariables. In this case, small Greek letters stand for for-
mulas, and big Greek letters (as Γ, Δ) stand for collections of formulas. A
further remark: In general, we do not work with L2 properly speaking,
but with definitional extensions of it, that is, with languages comprising
more symbols than the primitive ones, for instance, those given by the
next definition, so as with other common symbols, like , @0, R, ;, and
so on.5 Anyway, we shall continue to speak about L2 as the language
posed earlier or one of its definitional extensions.

Definition 3.2.2 (ABBREVIATIONS) Some abbreviations, given in the metalan-
guage, are, in order,6
                                              A Mathematical Background            47
   (i) α ^ β ≔ :(α ! :β)
  (ii) α _ β ≔ :α ! β
 (iii) α $ β ≔ (α ! β) ^ (β ! α)
 (iv) 9xα ≔ :8x:α
  (v) (8x 2 y)α ≔ 8x(x 2 y ! α)
 (vi) (9x 2 y)α ≔ 9x(x 2 y ^ α)

   In the expression 8xα, the formula α is called the scope of the quantifier
(the same holds for 9, since it is just an abbreviation). A variable x in a
formula α in the scope of a quantifier 8x or 9x is said to be a bound variable.
A free occurrence of a variable x in a formula α is an occurrence of x lies
outside the scope of a quantifier 8x (idem for 9x). In this case, x is said to
be free in α. We frequently write α(x1, . . ., xn) to indicate that all free variables
of α occur in the list x1, . . ., xn. A sentence is a formula without free variables.
   Let α(x) be a formula of L2 in which x is the only free variable. We shall
call this formula a condition. In the intuitive theory of sets (which admits as
‘sets’ whatever collection of objects you wish), we have the following prin-
ciple, called the Axiom of Comprehension for Classes; namely, given a con-
dition α(x), there exists a collection (called a class) which consists exactly of
those elements that satisfy the condition. We denote this class by

    fx : aðxÞg;                                                                 ð3:1Þ

which intuitively means ‘the class of those x that obey the condition α(x)’.
   As is well known, it is this principle that originates the paradoxes in the
intuitive set theory, such as Russell’s. Just take as the condition the assertion
that a set does not belong to itself (that is, α(x) $ x 2
                                                        = x); then, if we take the
formed collection to be a set, there exists the set of all sets that do not belong
to themselves, which belongs to itself if and only if it does not belong to
itself.7 So it is better to distinguish between sets and classes from now on;
sets will always be relative to a set theory, so Russell’s just mentioned
class {x : x 2 = x} is not a set of ZF(C) (supposed consistent). The same
happens with some ‘large’ classes, such as the class of all groups, of all
vector spaces, of all models of a scientific theory, which are also not sets
in ZF(C). These collections are very large to be sets of these theories (but
they can ‘exist’, for instance, in some stronger set theories, as we shall see
later). So what is a set? It depends on the axioms we use. In the next
section, we shall see the postulates that determine which are the sets of
ZF(C).8 Thus, to summarize, we should be careful in saying ZF-sets,
ZFC-sets, and so on. In principle, nothing prohibits Russell’s class from
being a set of some particular set theory; for instance, it is a PZF-set,
where PZF stands for paraconsistent Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (see da
Costa et al. [CosKraBue.06]). To summarize, given a set theory T, we
may have T-sets and other collections. The postulates of T provide the
grounds for the characterization (implicit definition) of the sets of T.
48 A Mathematical Background
3.2.1 The Postulates of ZF(C)
Let α(x) be a formula of L2 , where x is free. As we have seen, the collection of
the objects satisfying α(x) is written {x : α(x)} and is called a class. The ques-
tion is, which classes are sets? In other words, what conditions α(x) deter-
mine a set? The answer depends on the axioms we use, as we have already
commented. In ZF(C) we shall have some collections that will deserve to
be named sets, while others will not. Thus the postulates that follow deter-
mine which are the sets of ZF(C)9. There are different set theories (in fact,
potentially infinitely many). One of the most well known is the system
NBG, the von Neumann, Bernays, and Gödel set theory. In this theory, the
basic objects are classes (see [Men.97, chap.4]). But some of them are sets,
namely, those classes that belong to other classes. Those classes that do
not belong to other classes were termed proper classes by Gödel. The sets
of NBG and the sets of ZF(C) are essentially the same objects (NBG is a con-
servative extension of ZF(C)). As a main difference, however, notice that in
ZF(C) we do not officially quantify over classes, while in NBG we do.
   The logical postulates of ZF(C) are those of the first-order logic with
identity, that is, being α, β, and γ formulas, the following schema provide
the postulates:10

  (1) α ! (β ! α)
  (2) (α ! (β ! γ) ! ((α ! β) ! (α ! γ))
  (3) (:α ! :β) ! ((:α ! β) ! α))
  (4) α, α ! β/β (Modus Ponens)
  (5) 8xα(x) ! α(t), where t is a term free for x in α(x)
  (6) 8x(α ! β(x)) ! (α ! 8xβ(x)), if x does not appear free in α
  (7) α/8xα (Generalization)
  (8) 8x(x ¼ x)
  (9) u ¼ v ! (α(u) ! α(v)), where u and v are distinct terms of L2

    These are the axioms of the underlying logic, which is the classical
first-order predicate logic with identity. The specific postulates are the
following:

(ZF1) [Extensionality] 8x8y(8z(z 2 x $ z 2 y) ! x ¼ y)
  This is just stating that sets with the same elements are identical, the same
  set. The converse of the postulate (obtained by reverting the arrow) is a
  consequence of the logic axioms, in special of (9).
(ZF2) [Pair] 8x8y9z(8w(w 2 z $ w ¼ x _ w ¼ y))
  In the metalanguage, this set will be written z ¼ {x, y}. Obviously, the
  introduction of such names (new symbols, as mentioned earlier) is
  allowed because we can, in each case, prove existence (by the pair
  axiom ZF2, in this case), and unicity (by the extensionality axiom
  ZF1). The same remarks hold for the new symbols defined in what
                                            A Mathematical Background         49
  follows. A particular case of ZF2 is obtained when x ¼ y. In this case,
  we write z ¼ {x} and call it the unitary of x, which is unique to ZF1.
(ZF3) [Separation Axioms] If α(y) is a formula of L2 with y and z1, . . . zn as
  free variables in which x does not appear, then for each α, the following is
  an axiom: 8z1 . . . 8zn8w9x8y(y 2 x $ y 2 w ^ α(y)). In particular, when
  α has only y as its free variable, then 8w9x8y(y 2 x $ y 2 w ^ α(y)) is an
  axiom.

   Taking α(x) as x 6¼ x, and applying the separation schema on a set w
whatever, we get a set with no elements, which using the axiom ZF1 we
can show is unique. This set is called an ‘empty set’ and denoted by ;.
The set x of postulate ZF3 is written (in the metalanguage) as x ¼ {y 2
w : α(y)}. This poses a fundamental difference between this set and a
class as given by (3.1). Here the elements that belong to x are ‘separated’
from an already given set w, while in (3.1) they are not coming from a pre-
vious set. Thus axiom (ZF3) is called the postulate of the limitation of size
(of sets), and it is due to Zermelo.
                                                                       S
(ZF4) [Union] 8x9w8z(z 2 w $ 9y(zS2 y ^ y 2 x)). The set w is written x.
  In particular, we write u [ v for {u, v}, that is, when x has just two el-
  ements, u and v.

Definition 3.2.3 (SUBSETS) For any sets u and v, we pose u  v ≔ 8w(w 2 u
! w 2 v) and say that u is a subset of v. Furthermore, we write u v to
mean u  v ^ u 6¼ v. In this case, we say that u is a proper subset of v.

(ZF5) [Power Set] 8x9y8z(z 2 y $ z  x). The set y is written PðxÞ, the
  power set of x.

   Let α(x, y) be a formula. We say that it is x-functional if for any x there
exists just one y such that α(x, y) holds.11 We say this by writing 8x9!yα(x, y).
Then we have

(ZF6) [Substitution Axioms]

    8x9!yaðx; yÞ ! 8u9v8yðy 2 v $ 9xðx 2 u ^ aðx; yÞÞ:

   Intuitively speaking, the axiom (in reality, an axiom schema, for it gives
us an axiom for each functional formula α(x, y) we consider) says that the
image of a set by a function (as defined by a functional formula) is also a set.

Definition 3.2.4 (SUCESSOR) The sucessor of a set x is termed xþ and defined
as follows:

    xþ :¼ x [ fxg:
50 A Mathematical Background
(ZF7) [Infinity]
      9xð; 2 x ^ 8yðy 2 x ! yþ 2 xÞ:

By paying attention to the fact that ;þ ¼ ; [ {;} ¼ {;}, {;}þ ¼ {;, {;}}, etc.,
we realize that the set postulated to exist by the infinity axiom contains the
empty set, its sucessor, and the sucessor of all its elements. Such a set is
called inductive. The intersection of all inductive sets is defined to be the
set of natural numbers.

Definition 3.2.5 (THE SET OF NATURAL NUMBERS) The set of natural numbers
is the least inductive set, denoted by ω.

Such a set, the least inductive set, is formed by taking the intersection of all
inductive sets; in informal mathematics, it is denoted by ‘N’. Now, follow-
ing von Neumann, we offer the next definition.

Definition 3.2.6 (THE NATURAL NUMBERS) The (von Neumann) natural
numbers are defined as follows:

0≔;
1 ≔ 0þ ¼ {;} ¼ {0}
2 ≔ 1þ ¼ {0, 1}
3 ≔ 2þ ¼ {0, 1, 2}
...
n ≔ {0, 1, . . ., n  1}
...
  Thus, due to ZF7, we can write
      o :¼ f0; 1; 2; 3; . . .g:

(ZF8) [Regularity or Foundation]
      8xðx 6¼ ; ! ð9y 2 xÞð8z 2 xÞðz 2
                                     = yÞÞ:

  This axiom says that any non-empty set x has an element whose intersec-
  tion with x is the empty set. That is, such an element has as elements no
  element of x. Thus, in particular, x cannot have itself as an element. Let
  us prove this result with some care.

  Theorem 3.2.1 Due to the axiom of regularity, there exists no set having
  itself as an element.
  Proof: Let us suppose that x 2 x. Then x 6¼ ;. Since x 2 {x}, we have x 2 x
  \ {x} (let us call this result (?)). By (ZF8), there exists y 2 {x} such that y \
  {x} ¼ ;. But, since {x} is unitary, the only element to be chosen is x itself.
                                           A Mathematical Background          51
  Hence we must have x \ {x} ¼ ;, which is contradictory to (?). So our
  hypothesis that x 2 x must be rejected.

  It is important to say that the axiom of regularity is essential in this proof.
  If the theory does not assume it—it can be proven that ZF8 is indepen-
  dent of the remaining axioms of ZF(C)—12 then this possibility
  remains open. In the same vein, without regularity, there may exist
  extraordinary sets (a term coined by Mirimanov in 1919), that is, sets
  involving chains of the following kind: x 2 xn 2 . . . 2 x2 2 x1 2 x.
  By adding the next axiom, we get the theory ZFC
(ZF9) [Axiom of Choice]
      8xðð8y 2 xÞ ! y 6¼ ;Þ ^ ð8t 2 xÞð8z 2 xÞðt 6¼ z
         ! t \ z ¼ ;Þ ! ðð9t  xÞð8u 2 xÞ ! 9vðt \ u ¼ fvgÞÞÞ:

   The intuitive explanation of this axiom is given a non-empty set whose
elements are also non-empty sets, and then there exists a set (the choice
set) formed by just one element of each of the elements of the given set.
There are many formulations equivalent to this one.
   We could formulate these axioms without employing any of the defined
symbols such as , [, and others. But we have used them here to keep the
text more easily readable. The Axiom of Choice is considered the second
most famous axiom of all mathematics, losing only to Euclid’s parallel pos-
tulate. There are excellent books on its history and importance (see for in-
stance [Moo.82]; [FraBarLev.73, ch.2]).



3.2.2 A Matter of Terminology
We can consider several theories different from the aforementioned axio-
matics. Let us fix some terminology:

  1. ZF is the theory without the Axiom of Choice
  2. ZFC is the theory encompassing all axioms noted earlier.
  3. ZF is ZF minus the axiom of regularity and the same for ZFC.
  4. Zp is the theory obtained by dropping the axioms of regularity and
     replacement. This is essentially the ‘pure’ Zermelo’s set theory
     (without ur-elements or Urelemente).
  5. ZF is the theory obtained from the aforementioned axiomatics
     (without choice) by adding the Axiom of Inaccessible Cardinals to
     be explained in the next section; similarly, we get ZFC .

   We remark that all these theories have the same language and underlying
logic. Their differences reside in the specific axioms.
52 A Mathematical Background
3.2.3 Inaccessible Cardinals
There are some collections whose existence cannot be proved in ZF(C), sup-
posing this theory is consistent.13 Among them, we mention just the state-
ment to the effect that there exists a strong inaccessible cardinal. We don’t
need to consider those statements here (but see the footnote at the end of
this chapter); we mention them just to acknowledge their importance, for
by adding the mentioned axiom, we get a theory ZF(C) where we can
prove the consistency of ZF(C).
    A cardinal λ is strongly inaccessible if it satisfies the following conditions:
(i) for every cardinal β, if β < λ, then 2β < λ; (ii) if {βi}i2I is a family of car-
dinals such that cardðIÞ < l and βi < λ for every i 2 I, then
supfbi : i 2 Ig < l. It is enough to acknowledge that formulas expressing
these facts are available and can be added to ZF(C) in order to get a stron-
ger theory in which a model of ZF(C) can be built; we shall return to this
problem soon. Other postulates could be introduced with the same finality,
such as those postulating the existence of a universe, but we shall not con-
sider them here (but see the next chapters and [BrigCos.71]).


3.2.4 Informal Semantics of L2
From the formal point of view, the symbols of L2 have no meaning. But,
intentionally, we usually accept that they make reference to the objects of
a certain intuitive non-empty domain of objects we conceive as representing
sets, but in principle, they could be of any ‘nature’ we wish. Let us be a little
bit more precise.

Definition 3.2.7 A structure for interpreting L2 is an ordered pair
A ¼ hD; xi, where D is a non-empty set and ξ is a binary relation on D.
    Due to Gödel’s second incompleteness theorem, the consistence of ZF(C)
cannot be proved with its own resources. We need a stronger theory where
we can build a model of ZF(C), such as ZF(C) mentioned earlier. Thus the
structure A of the previous definition cannot be a set of ZF(C). The con-
struction must be done, say, in ZF(C) or in informal metamathematics (in-
formal set theory).
    The intended interpretation ascribes the diagonal of D—namely, the set
ΔD ¼ {ha, ai: a 2 D}—to the identity symbol of L2 and the binary relation
ξ to the membership relation. The expressions 8xα(x) and 9xα(x), where α
(x) is a formula of L2 in which x is the only free variable, mean ‘for all el-
ements of D’ and ‘there exists an element of D’ such that α(x) holds,
respectively.
    One of the outstanding problems in the study of models of set theory is
to find an interpretation that makes the postulates of ZF ‘true’ (in the intu-
itive sense). To begin with, let us reproduce here some examples of possible
interpretations for L2 . Later we shall mention some more suitable ones. The
                                           A Mathematical Background         53
first interpretation takes D as the set Z of the integers and ξ as the usual or-
dering relation < on the integers. Thus the integers are now our ‘sets’, and x
2 y means x < y. Of course, this is an interpretation as we have described
informally; to the predicate ¼ of identity we associate the set of all couples
hx, xi with x 2 Z, and the connectives and quantifiers are interpreted as
usual (9x means ‘there exists an integer x so that . . .’ and so on). It is
easy to see that this structure models the axiom of extensionality; just sub-
stitute < for 2 in the axiom to see that its translation to the language of the
integers becomes a theorem of this theory. In the same way, we can show
that the pair axiom also holds in this structure. But the theorem that
asserts that there exists an empty set does not hold. In fact, let us consider
the sentence (a formula without free variables)
      8x0 9x1 ðx1 2 x0 Þ:                                                 ð3:2Þ

The reader should recognize that (3.2) stands for a formula of L2 , which
expresses the mentioned theorem. In the metalanguage, we could write
8x9y(y 2 x)). According to our interpretation, it means that for any
integer there exists an integer that is less than it. It is easy to see that
the translation of this sentence to the language of our interpretation
(there exists an integer that is less than any integer) is false. Thus the
given structure is not a model for ZF(C), for it does not model one of
its postulates.
    Now let us take another interpretation using D ¼ N (the set of the intu-
itive natural numbers) and ξ being the order relation < on such a domain.
Now not only are the pair axiom and the extensionality axiom true accord-
ing to this interpretation but also the theorem, asserting that there exists an
empty set. But the new structure does not model all axioms of ZF(C), which
can be checked by the reader. In fact, these interpretations are far from sui-
table for modeling all the axioms of ZF(C).


3.3    ‘MODELS’ OF ZF(C), AGAIN

A model of a formal theory, as we already know, is an interpretation that
makes its postulates true. Can we think of models of ZF(C) in this sense? As
we have mentioned before, we can, but the corresponding structures will be
‘sets’ that are not ZF(C)-sets.
   The consistency of ZF(C) can be proven only relative to another stron-
ger theory whose consistency is then put also into question, and to answer
whether this stronger theory is by its turn consistent, we will need a still
stronger theory, and so on. An absolute proof of consistency requires
that we prove that the theory does not entail two contradictory formulas.
The two notions of consistency involved here—namely, relative and
absolute—are also called syntactical (when absolute) and ‘semantic’
54 A Mathematical Background
(when relative). More precisely, the syntactic (absolute) definition says
that a theory T, whose language contains a negation symbol :, is consis-
tent iff there is no formula α such that both α and :α are theorems of T.
The semantic (relative) definition says that a theory is consistent if and
only if it has a model (an interpretation that satisfies the axioms of T).
Semantic consistency implies syntactic consistency and Henkin’s Com-
pleteness Theorem (which holds in a restricted form also for higher-
order languages) establishes that syntactic consistency is enough for a
theory to have a model.
   The reason we cannot prove the relative consistency of ZF(C) within the
theory itself was mentioned earlier, and is due to Gödel’s second incom-
pleteness theorem. But, being consistent, ZF(C) has ‘models’. The model
that interests us here is called the well-founded cumulative hierarchy of
sets, or the von Neumann universe, termed V. The construction of V is
made on transfinite recursion on the class On of the ordinals (which is
also not a ZF(C)-set),

    On ¼ f0; 1; 2; . . . ; o; o þ 1; . . . ; o2; o2 þ 1; . . . ; o2 ; . . .g:   ð3:3Þ


   The construction goes by defining a hierarchy Vα (α 2 On) as follows:

  V0 ¼ ;
.. 1 ¼ PðV0 Þ
 V
 .
 Vnþ1 ¼ S PðVn Þ
  V
 .. l ¼  b<l PðVb Þ, for λ a limit ordinal
                                          14

  .    S
  V ¼ a2On Va

    In terms of structures, we may write WF ¼ hV; 2i, with ‘WF’ standing
for ‘well-founded’; that is, the sets in the universe obey the axiom of
foundation.
    Now it is a mathematical exercise to show that the axioms of ZF(C)
are ‘true’ (in the intuitive sense) in this structure, which is represented in
Figure 3.1.
    The remarks that follow will make reference to both universes. First of
all, it should be noticed that any Vα is a transitive class. Now let us consider
the following question: given a certain ordinal α, which axioms of ZFC are
satisfied in hVα, 2i, where 2 the membership relation relativized to Vα (that
is, x 2 y means x 2 y and x, y 2 Vα)? It is interesting that we can prove the
following results:15

  (i) Any Vα is a model of the following axioms: extensionality, separa-
      tion, union, power set, choice, regularity.
                                           A Mathematical Background         55




Figure 3.1 The well-founded ‘model’ of pure ZF(C)



  (ii) For the pair axiom, we need α as a limit ordinal. This can intuitively
       be understood for the set of two objects is of a higher level than the
       levels of the objects.
 (iii) For the infinity axiom, we need that α be a limit ordinal greater than
       ω, for instance, ω2.
 (iv) For the replacement axioms, we need more, for instance, an inac-
       cessible cardinal.
  (v) The whole V is a model of ZF(C).

    Remember that we call Zp the Zermelo set theory, which is ZF without
the substitution (replacement) axioms. All the levels Vα can be constructed
in Zp as well. But, from the aforementioned results, we see that Vω2 is a
‘model’ of Z2, since ω2 is a limit ordinal. Then, if consistent, Z2 cannot
admit Vω2 as one of its sets, for in this case, we would be against Gödel’s
second incompleteness theorem. Reasoning in the same vein, we cannot
prove the existence of inaccessible cardinals within ZF(C). Thus we
can’t prove the existence of V, the whole universe of sets, within ZF(C).
Of course, we could think that the universe can be constructed within a
stronger theory, say ZF , which is ZF plus an axiom that says that there
exists an inaccessible cardinal (according to the terminology introduced
earlier). This is true, but we would just transfer the problem to this stronger
theory, for we also don’t know what its notion of set means, and a model for
it would be needed. This problem raises interesting philosophical questions,
due to the fact that, if consistent, a set theory such as ZF(C) (formulated as a
first-order theory) is not categorical.16
56 A Mathematical Background
   We have made such a digression on set theory and on its ‘models’ just to
show to the reader that there are differences in speaking of certain struc-
tures as models of certain theories and ‘models’ of the set theories them-
selves. The models of both mathematical and scientific theories, such as
groups, vectors spaces, Euclidean geometry, metric spaces, differentiable
manifolds, classical mechanics, and relativity theory can be constructed
within Zp, ZF, or ZFC, depending on the particular theory. But the
‘models’ of these theories themselves cannot be constructed within them-
selves (supposing them consistent). In the next section, we shall discuss a
particular case involving quantum mechanics.



3.4   URELEMENTE

Abraham Fraenkel has shown that the ur-elements are not necessary for the
foundations of mathematics, and his ideas (just as Skolem’s) have led to a
‘pure’ set theory whose stages begin from the empty set seen earlier. But,
for applications in the empirical theories, it seems that we need entities
that are not sets, the ur-elements, or simply atoms. Here we are supposing,
of course, as it seems reasonable, that physical objects such as chairs, mol-
ecules of a gas, elementary particles, and so on are not sets, so they can be
reasonably represented by atoms.
   A typical set theory with atoms is termed ZFU (Zermelo–Fraenkel with
Urelemente), perhaps encompassing the Axiom of Choice. Here we will
not write ZFC(U). The universe of ZFU (drawn in Figure 3.4 can also be
constructed by transfinite recursion on the ordinals by assuming the exis-
tence of a non-empty set U of Urelemente, as follows:


V0 ¼ U
.. 1 ¼ V0 [ PðV0 Þ
V
 .
 Vnþ1 ¼ S Vn [ PðVn Þ
V.. l ¼  b<l PðVb Þ, for λ a limit ordinal
  .    S
  V ¼ a2On Va

   The axioms of ZFU are similar to those above, but must be modified ac-
cordingly in order to admit the existence of distinct Urelemente. Let us
present these axioms rather briefly. The language of ZFU, which we call
LU has, in addition to the primitive vocabulary of L2 , an additional
unary predicate symbol U so that U(x) says that x is an Urelement. So
we have the following definition:
                                             A Mathematical Background          57




Figure 3.2 The universe of sets with Urelemente. On is the class of ordinals, and U
is the set of atoms (Urelemente)



Definition 3.4.1 C ðxÞ :¼ :UðxÞ
   Intuitively speaking, C ðxÞ says that x is a set. We use restricted quanti-
fiers in the following sense: 8C xaðxÞ means 8xðC ðxÞ ! aðxÞÞ, and 9C xaðxÞ
means 9xðC ðxÞ ^ aðxÞÞ . The same can be done for other defined predicates
(see axiom ZFU4). The logical postulates are those of the first-order clas-
sical logic with identity, and the specific postulates may be stated as
follows:

(ZFU1)[Extensionality] 8C x8C yð8zðz 2 x $ z 2 yÞ ! x ¼ yÞ
  Two sets are equal if they have the same elements (either sets or
  Urelemente).

   In set theory, Urelemente is synonymous with atoms (objects that are not
sets but which may be elements of sets). Thus sometimes the words ‘atom’
and ‘atoms’ are used there in this sense. This axiom enables the theory
to be compatible with the existence of different atoms, other objects
than the empty set (which is a set). Next, we shall speak a little bit about
atoms.

(ZFU2)[Empty set] 9C x8yðy 2   = xÞ
  The existence of an empty set termed ; and proved that it is unique by
  extensionality.
(ZFU3)[Pair] 8x8y9C z8wðw 2 z $ w ¼ x _ w ¼ yÞ
  As is usual, this set is written z ¼ {x, y}.

Definition 3.4.2 EðxÞ :¼ C ðxÞ ^ 8yðy 2 x ! C ðyÞÞ
  Which says that x is a set whose elements are also sets.
58 A Mathematical Background
(ZFU4)[Union] 8E x9C y8zðz 2 y $ 9wðw 2 z ^ z 2 xÞÞ
  In the next two axioms, the definitions are as in the case of ZF(C).
(ZFU5)[Power Set] 8C x9C y8zðz 2 y $ C ðzÞ ^ z  xÞ
(ZFU6)[Infinity] 9C xð; 2 x ^ 8C yðy 2 x ! yþ 2 xÞÞ
(ZFC7)[Foundation/Regularity] 8C xðEðxÞ ! 9yðy 2 x ^ y \ x ¼ ;Þ
  Given that the elements of a set x are also sets, then x has an element that
  has no common element with x.
(ZFU8)[Replacement] Let α(x, y) be a formula where x and y are free and z
  is not free. Then
      8x9!yaðx; yÞ ! 8x9C y8zðz 2 y $ 9wðw 2 x ^ aðw; zÞÞÞ:

  That is, if α(x, y) ascribe just one y for each x, then there exists the so-
  called α-image of any element of the domain.
(ZFU9)[Choice]
       8C xðEðxÞ ^ ð8C y 2 xÞðy 2
                                = ;Þ ^ ð8z 2 xÞð8w 2 xÞðz \ w ¼ ;Þ !
          9C tð8z 2 tÞð9sðz \ t ¼ fsgÞÞÞ



3.4.1 Some Comments
We could add to this axiomatic some further axioms, such as one of the
following:

(ZFUa)[Non existence of atoms] 8xC ðxÞ
(ZFCb)[Atoms are void] 8x8yðy 2 x ! C ðxÞÞ

   The first one makes the theory essentially ZFC. The second one (which is
implied by the first) says that atoms have no elements. This is interesting, for
since we think of atoms as, say, physical objects, perhaps it would be better
to think of them as composed of parts in a mereological sense.17 Thus this
axiomatics should be increased by a relation symbol for “part-whole” and
the corresponding axioms for a mereology. But this is not our topic here.
   An important result is that ZFU is equiconsistent with ZF(C); that is, one
of them is consistent iff the another one is consistent too.



3.5   MORE ON THE ‘MODELS’ OF ZF(C)

We have remarked that ZF (Zp, ZFC, ZFU), formulated as as first-order
theory, is not categorical. Let us comment a little bit on this claim in
order to see its consequences, even to physical theories.
   We shall mention just a case, among several possible others, which could
be obtained by using techniques such as Cohen’s forcing, but which are out
                                           A Mathematical Background        59
of the scope of this text. The importance of the ‘models’ of set theory for the
philosophy of science may be explained as follows. A formalized theory
(even of the empirical sciences), say by a Suppes predicate, is generally elab-
orated to cope with a certain informal given theory, as we have seen before.
But in order to achieve this aim, we need to provide an interpretation to our
formalism, generally by associating to it a structure built in set theory or,
what is the same, in a ‘model’ of the set theory we use as our metatheory.
But a set theory such as ZF (ZF(C), ZFU) has different models. If axioma-
tized as a first-order theory, it has even a denumerable ‘model’ due to the
Löwenheim-Skolem theorem, and since, in general, we never know what
model we are working in, we really will have difficulties granting that the
interpretation we provide fits the intended concepts. We remark once
more that despite the fact that we can think in sets and related concepts
as if we are inside the ‘standard model’ of ZF(C), we cannot grant that
this is really so, for we have no grounds for proving that such a ‘model’
exists. Let us consider a particular example concerning denumerable
‘models’ only.
    Real numbers can be used in physics for representing time, probability
measures, eigenvalues of self-adjoint operators, to parametrize certain func-
tions, and so on. The physicist with no logical background has an intuitive
idea of what real numbers are as well as what sets are. If pressed, a physicist
may even make reference to some construction of the set of real numbers
from the rationals, say by convergent sequences (Cauchy sequences) or by
Dedekind cuts (see [End.77, pp.111ff], [Fra.82, pp.87ff]). Say these con-
structions are done within ZF(C). But suppose ZF(C) is consistent. Then
it has ‘models’. The first we can imagine may be called the standard
model, which is more or less identified with a ‘universe of sets’ such as
the universe V seen before. But, as we have seen, we cannot prove in ZF
(C) that such a ‘model’ exists, so we don’t have any evidence that our intu-
itive account of sets, that is, our intuitive idea of a set, is captured by the
elements of such a universe. But there is more. As a first-order theory, ZF
(C) is subjected to the Löwenheim-Skolem theorem, which implies two
things: first, since any model of ZF(C) must satisfy the axiom of infinite,
ZF(C) will have an infinite ‘model’ (recall that ‘model’ is being written in
quotation marks to emphasize that it is not a set of ZF(C) but a proper
class). Then, by the upward Löwenheim-Skolem theorem, ZF(C) has non-
isomorphic models of any infinite cardinality. Second, let us fix in the
other result entailed by this theorem: by the downward Löwenheim-
Skolem theorem, having models, ZF(C) has a denumerable model.18
What does this mean for empirical science?
    Let us suppose that our theory T demands the real number system, as
most physical theories do. Then it seems ‘natural’ to suppose that the set
R of the real numbers is not denumerable, as Cantor showed in the nine-
teenth century with his famous diagonal argument. But in such a denumer-
able ‘model’, the set that (in the ‘model’) corresponds to the set of real
60 A Mathematical Background
numbers must be denumerable. This is of course puzzling, but there is not a
contradiction here. As remarked by Skolem, this result, known as the
‘Skolem paradox’ is not a formal ‘paradox’, but just a result that goes
against our intuition, showing that within ZF(C) (that is, a ZF(C)-set)
there is no bijection between R and ω, but this does not entail that such
a bijection does not exist outside ZF(C)—that is, as something that is not
a ZF(C)-set. Thus if a physical theory demands a mathematical concept
that, if standardly defined, presupposes the set of real numbers, how can
we grant that it is non-denumerable? In other words, how can we ensure
that, working within ZF(C) we are making reference to some ‘model’
that fits our intuitive claims? Unfortunately, this is not possible, and the
best we can do is to fix a particular ‘model’ of ZF(C) when we need to
give an interpretation of concepts, but we will always be subject to ques-
tionings. Indeed, as remarked, we can’t show that even the so-called stan-
dard (intended) model of ZF(C) does exist!
   On what concerns scientific theories, as remarked by da Costa, “we
should never forget that set theories, supposed consistent, have non-
standard ‘models’, thus any theory founded on them will have non-standard
models too.” 19 This entails that if we try to provide an understanding for
the concepts we use (that is, by giving them an interpretation), we need to
consider ‘models’ of ZF(C) and this poses a challenge: we never know in
which model we are working so we really never know what our concepts
actually mean. All we can do is suppose we are working in the standard
‘model’, where (apparently) sets are just as we imagine, that the real
numbers cannot be enumerated, that there are basis for our vector
spaces, and so on. The investigation of non-standard models for physical
theories is still a novel domain of research, and it most likely will be a
rich one.



NOTES

   1. In fact, we could have used a different language, for instance, by adopting
      distinct primitive symbols and perhaps other postulates (which would be
      in most cases equivalent to the ones presented here). There is also the
      more relevant possibility of constructing a theory grounded on second-
      order logic, as Zermelo seems to have preferred—see [Moo.82, pp.267ff]
      —(or still higher-order) logic, and in this case, in fact, we should have differ-
      ent theories, for their properties would certainly be distinct.
   2. There is a French version of this book, translated by Jean-Yves Béziau, called
      Logique Classique et Non-Classique, Paris, Flammarion, 1996.
   3. In a broad sense, we use not only deductive inferences when elaborating a
      theory but also (at least) inductive and abductive, to use Peirce’s teminology
      [Dou.11].
   4. For instance, usually we reason more or less well in the domains where we
      suppose classical logic works, but if we need to go to other domains, logic
      needs to be made explicit.
                                            A Mathematical Background            61
 5. We could add these new symbols for relations, operations, or individual con-
    stants to the language L2 , but with some care. The details about how this can
    be done is presented in [Sups.57, Chap.7].
 6. The symbol “:=” means ‘equal by definition’.
 7. For more details, see the introduction of [Men.97].
 8. Please be careful here: a group, a scientific theory such as classical particle
    mechanics, is described mathematically by structures that are sets. But the
    collections of all groups, of all particle mechanics, are not sets of ZF(C) sup-
    posed consistent.
 9. However, notice that the axioms themselves do not contain the word ‘set’.
    So, in this sense, the axioms only put some constraints in possible classes
    of objects satisfying them, with no warrant that every one of such classes
    will be close enough to our ‘intended’ model.
10. The meaning of the word ‘schema’ here is the following one: for instance, in
    the first one, we get a postulate (synonymous of ‘axiom’) by exchanging α
    and β by formulas of L2 , and in every case, the same Greek letters must
    be exchanged by the same formulas.
11. Intuitively speaking, α(x, y) is a formula that defines a function or mapping
    in the variable x.
12. A sentence S is independent of a theory T if the postulates of T prove neither
    S nor the negation of S. Remember that this is what happens with the famous
    parallel axiom in Euclidean geometry. The same will happen with the Axiom
    of Choice in ZF, as we have mentioned already.
13. Sometimes logicians bore the reader with details. But it is necessary to take
    into account that when we say that something (some set) ‘exists’ in ZF(C),
    we are assuming that this theory is consistent. If it is not, since its logic is
    classical logic, we can prove that any set (collection, class) belongs to it,
    which is something of course we would not like to admit. Hence the remark.
14. An ordinal α is a limit ordinal if there is no ordinal β such that α ¼ β þ 1.
    Typical limit ordinals are ω, ω2, ω2, etc.
15. Let M be a class (it may be a set) and F a formula of L2 . The formula FM is
    called the relativization of F to M if it is obtained by substituting 9x 2 M for
    9x, and 8x 2 M for 8x. Thus it says exactly what F says but concerning el-
    ements of M only. The results that follow are proven in [Fra.82, pp.298ff];
    [End.77, pp.249ff]; [Fra.82, p.289].
16. A theory is categorical if all of its models are isomorphic.
17. Mereology, or the logic of parts and wholes, was developed initially by Stan-
    islaw Lesniewicz, and has been studied from different perspectives ever since;
    see Simons [Sim.87].
18. Roughly speaking, the downward version of the theorem says that if a con-
    sistent theory T in a countable language has a model, then it has a denumer-
    able model. The upward theorem says that such a theory, having infinite
    models, has models of any infinite cardinality.
19. Personal communication.
4      Criticism of the Axiomatic
       Method and Its Defense




There seems to be no doubt that the axiomatic method (AM) has achieved
tremendous success in mathematics. Nowadays it would be difficult to find
a field of pure mathematics not presented by employing this method
(generally, as an abstract axiomatics). Real numbers, natural numbers, topo-
logical spaces, vector (linear) spaces, groups, rings, fields, etc., are presented
axiomatically.1 For instance, many mathematicians think that for some final-
ities it is easier to present, say, the real numbers as a complete ordered field
than to construct the real numbers system as Dedekind cuts or as equivalence
classes of Cauchy sequences (among other possibilities). Of course this
depends on the aims and purposes of the mathematician. But it seems clear
that the axiomatization of a certain field enables us to determine from a
certain point of view those concepts and assumptions that could be taken
as basic in the field, acknowledging also the resources available to the deduc-
tive apparatus employed (we mean the underlying logic—mathematicians
usually assume something along the lines of classical logic in their deductions,
so the use of classical reduction to the absurd, for instance, is available).
    When a field of mathematics is presented axiomatically, it is in general as
an abstract axiomatics; the field of real numbers, for instance, when presented
as a complete ordered field, is nothing more than a particular structure of a
certain general kind (the kind of complete ordered fields), or species, to use
Bourbaki’s terminology [Bou.68]. But we can easily realize that no standard
mathematical book of analysis, algebra, etc., speaks of the underlying logic.2
But despite the achieved success, the method was not taken for granted by all
mathematicians and philosophers, not to speak of physicists. Several criti-
cisms were advanced against axiomatization. In this chapter, we shall see
some of them, and in the final part, we present a defense of the method.


4.1   DOES THE AM ENCOMPASS HEURISTICS?

One of the most interesting criticisms to the AM was advanced by Imre
Lakatos in his Proofs and Refutations [Lak.76]. It should be remembered
that in this book, as well as in other places, Lakatos tries to bring to
                  Criticism to the Axiomatic Method and its Defense        63
mathematics the Popperian scheme of knowledge growing—namely, by
‘proofs and refutations’. Lakatos holds that informal (inhaltliche) mathe-
matics proceeds exactly as Popper proposed regarding the empirical disci-
plines. According to Popper, the scientist starts with a problem (P1),
provides a tentative theory (TT), which attempts to give us a tentative solu-
tion. Then tests are made and if something goes wrong, he or she tries to
eliminate the errors (EE), which leads him or her to another problem,
P2.3 Then the scheme is back to its starting point. The same happens in in-
formal mathematics, says Lakatos. The mathematician starts with a
problem, say Euler’s conjecture that the relation between the number of
vertices V, the number of edges E, and the number of faces F of polyhedra,
in particular the regular ones, is given by Euler’s formula V  E þ F ¼ 2.
There is also a ‘proof’ of this conjecture. The ‘proof’ then faces counter-
examples, showing that the formula does not apply to any polyhedra, say
for that one formed by a cube with a hole whose intersection with the
two opposite faces is a square (in this case, it was later noticed that V  E
þ F ¼ 0).4 The scheme goes as follows: given some evidence, the scientist
makes a conjecture by means of a hypothesis (inside a certain scientific
theory). The cases that agree with the conjecture simply corroborate it. But
the conjecture may admit counter examples. In this case, some change is
required in the conjecture (and in the theory). To Lakatos, the same
happens in informal mathematics, as his example shows us. So, he says,
(informal) mathematics proceeds by ‘proofs’ and refutations.
    Axiomatic theories, on the other hand, says Lakatos, do not allow such
revisions. What we derive from the axioms are the theorems of the theory,
and they do not admit counterexamples (in the theory, supposed consis-
tent). According to Lakatos, axiomatized mathematical theories, which
he identifies with the formalist school headed by Hilbert (which as we see
is not completely right, for we could make use of either concrete or abstract
axiomatics without recurring to strict formalization), are tautological, just
providing results (the theorems) which in a certain sense are already implicit
in the axioms. A proof, in axiomatized mathematics, is nothing more than
an unbreakable chain of mechanical procedures that go from premises to
conclusions. Informal mathematics, on the contrary, as in Popper’s
account to natural sciences, proceeds by presenting criticisms to the conjec-
tures, explanations, and discussions that make the conjecture more plausi-
ble and convincing due to the existence of counterexamples. So
axiomatization does not involve heuristics, hypotheses, and explanations
other than those already implicit in the axioms.



4.1.1 The Axiomatic Method and Heuristics
There is a reasonable sense according to which we can say that the AM
involves heuristics. Following Suppes, we can distinguish between two
64 Criticism to the Axiomatic Method and its Defense
kinds of axiomatics: heuristic and unheuristic. By heuristic axioms, says
Suppes,

    I mean that the analysis yields axioms that seem intuitively to organize
    and facilitate our thinking about the subject, and in particular to for-
    mulate, in an ordinarily self-contained way, problems concerned with
    the phenomena governed by the theory and their solutions.
                                                                   [Sups.83]

That is, the heuristic axiomatics provides us a clear understanding of the
field, this being understood as linked to our intuitions concerning the field
under analysis. Peano’s original axiomatics and Zermelo’s set theory are
typical examples, for they are in agreement with our intuitions. But
Suppes also speaks of unheuristic axiomatics. He does not say that these
types of axiomatization are devoid of value, but simply they are artificial,
not intuitive, not representing “the kind of transparent and conceptually
satisfactory solution we should aim at whenever possible” (ibid.).
Suppes doesn’t mention either Peano or Zermelo, but the axioms of the
field of real numbers. The construction of the real numbers by Dedekind
cuts or by equivalence classes of Cauchy sequences, he says, are unnatural
to deal with, contrarily to the axioms of a complete ordered field, which
he regards as “very natural and intuitive”. The same happens with Kolmo-
gorov’s axioms for probabilities. The unheuristic example is Mackey’s
axioms for non-relativistic quantum mechanics. In fact, despite
Mackey’s formulation being very useful, there is no discussion about the
motivations and it is quite artificial, for “the axioms taken literally
present a wrong picture of how to think about physical problems in
quantum mechanics”.
    Suppes links heuristics with intuitiveness, a vague concept. We think we
have other arguments for defending the heuristic role of the axiomatic
method by pointing out that only by axiomatizing arithmetics within a
first-order logic were we able to discover the existence of non-standard
models. The same can be said about first-order real number theory. Thus
we have discovered things that were inaccessible to us without the strict ap-
plication of AM; that is, without axiomatizing arithmetics, we would never
be aware of non-standard natural numbers. The same can be said of many
other fields; without axiomatics, we probably would never have arrived at
non-Euclidean geometries, such as the study of distinct (non-equivalent)
formulations of set theory, versions of set theory where the Axiom of
Choice does not hold non-commutative and non-associative algebras, and
so on. Even logic was made clear only after its formulation in axiomatic
terms, starting with Aristotle. Thus we regard AM as heuristic it may
lead to the discovery of many new fields of inquiry, although sometimes
it may be quite artificial. In this sense, heuristic power needs not always co-
incide with intuitiveness.
                   Criticism to the Axiomatic Method and its Defense          65
4.2   TRUESDELL AGAINST THE ‘SUPPESIANS’

As we shall see in more detail in the next chapters, Patrick Suppes and collab-
orators have developed a way of axiomatizing a scientific theory by assuming
set theory (some set theory, but since it is not made explicit, we should take it
in terms of his heuristics, that is, the most intuitive one—he speaks of infor-
mal set theory).5 Set theory is a general framework where all usual concepts
needed in mathematics (and in the usual physical theories) can be developed:
functions, vectors, differential equations, manifolds, geometries.6
    Recall that it was traditionally thought that the Received View of scien-
tific theories required that every scientific theory should be axiomatized in a
first-order language. Suppes [Sups.67], in particular, also advanced such a
reading (which, as we have seen, is misguided; again see our discussion in
chapter 1). As an alternative to such a restrictive framework, Suppes
thought that logic and the basic mathematics should be taken for granted
if we assume a set theory right from the start, as we shall see in chapters
to come. Suppes didn’t mention which set theory he was thinking about,
but this is just what he intended to presuppose: any set theory able to
express the necessary mathematical tools demanded by the theory being
dealt with will do. Without the need of specifying a particular set theory,
naïve set theory can be taken for granted. Hence by presupposing logic
and the relevant mathematics, he presents a case of what we have termed
‘abstract axiomatization’.
    As we have already discussed briefly in chapter 1 and we will present with
details in chapters 5 and 6, Suppes’s technique allows us to represent a theory
as a given class of models of a certain set-theoretical predicate (here, recall,
models are understood in terms of mathematical structures). One of the
most celebrated examples is classical particle mechanics (CPM), which
McKinsey, Suppes, and Sugar presented in an axiomatized form in 1953
(see [Sups.02] for an updated version and also the next chapters).
    CPM deals with ‘particles’ and the forces acting on them. But what are
particles? In the spirit of abstract axiomatics, we should not pose this ques-
tion. It is a primitive concept. CPM serves to deal with several distinct
models of particle systems, such as the solar system, the molecules of a
certain gas, and, in general, with whatever collection of objects that fulfill
the conditions of the theory and make its postulates true. In each of these
models, the objects of the domain are the particles. But CPM does not
deal with interaction among particles, with collisions and other phenomena
typical of what in physics is called continuum mechanics. And here lies the
core of one of the most famous attacks on the axiomatic method as em-
ployed by Suppes: Truesdell’s criticism.
    Clifford Truesdell was an influent American mathematician who con-
tributed to the foundations of several areas in the physical sciences, in par-
ticular in continuum rational mechanics. He was also the editor of the
Journal of Rational Mechanics and Analysis, to which McKinsey, Sugar,
66 Criticism to the Axiomatic Method and its Defense
and Suppes submitted their papers on the axiomatization of classical parti-
cle mechanics [McSS.53], so Truesdell’s opinion on the issue should be of
greatest relevance. One of the papers was published with a note by Trues-
dell, stating that

    [t]he communicator is in complete disagreement with the view of clas-
    sical mechanics expressed in this article. He agrees, however, that strict
    axiomatization of general mechanics—not merely the degenerate and
    conceptually insignificant special case of particle mechanics—is ur-
    gently required. While he does not believe the present work achieves
    any progress whatever toward the precision of the concept of force,
    which always has been and remains still the central conceptual
    problem, and indeed the only one not essentially trivial, in the founda-
    tions of classical mechanics, he hopes that publication of this paper
    may arouse the interest of students of mechanics and logic alike, thus
    perhaps leading eventually to a proper solution of this outstanding
    but neglected problem.

   Later, in chap.39 of his book An Idiot’s Fugitive Essay on Science:
Methods, Criticism, Training, Circumstances, titled ‘Suppesian Stews’
[True.84], he considered once again Suppes et al.’s methods, providing a
long criticism, saying in particular that

    McKinsey, Sugar, & Suppes gave no example of how to use their par-
    adigm [that of presenting a set theoretical predicate, as it became clear
    in Suppes’ works, as we shall see later] for any purpose in the practice
    or development of mechanics, and so far as I can learn, no-one has done
    so. While the Suppesians content themselves with admiring it for its
    perfection, specialists in mechanics have given in no heed, perhaps
    because it leaves out of account too much of the meat of the the me-
    chanics of Newton, Lagrange, and Cauchy—or, for that matter, of
    the content of any current textbook of mechanics for engineers.
                                                            [True.84, p.539]

   It is clear that Truesdell is criticizing the paper by McKinsey et al. for not
covering what he (correctly) considers the main part of mechanics—namely,
continuum mechanics—which deals with collisions and other concepts not
covered by particle mechanics. Part of his criticism is taken from a previous
book of Wolfgang Stegmüller [Steg.79], who has distinguished two versions
of the ‘structuralist view’ of theories in the version defended by W. Balzer
and others, which he calls ‘the Carnap approach’, and the version by
Suppes et al. termed the Suppes approach. Of course there are strong differ-
ences among these views that do not concern us here. What is relevant is that
Truesdell is complaining about the lack of adequate content of the proposal
of McKinsey et al. on what concerns the ‘real mechanics’.
                   Criticism to the Axiomatic Method and its Defense        67
   The question behind this criticism can be posed as follows: should an
axiomatic version of a theory necessarily cover every aspect of the theory?
The answer will lead us to a future section termed ‘Does axiomatics really ax-
iomatize?’, so we will not discuss it in full here. We only advance our opinion
that no, an axiomatic theory does not necessarily need to cover all the
theory’s subject area due fundamentally to two reasons: i) the scope of an in-
formal theory (which supposedly is being axiomatized) is not well defined,
and ii) this may not be of immediate interest to those who propose the axio-
matics. The first item is obvious. The second can be enlightened by McKin-
sey’s response to Truesdell, who had sent him a letter by Georg Hamel
evaluating the papers by the three authors given on the following grounds:

    Thank you [Truesdell] so much for your letter of October 21st, with the
    enclosed report of Professor Hamel on the two papers by Sugar,
    Suppes, and me.7 I should like to tell you that we have not been very
    impressed by Hamel’s criticisms, and that we still want to publish
    these papers in their present form.
       In the first place, with regard to Hamel’s criticism that our treatment
    is restricted to ‘the most meager mechanics of points’, it does not
    appear reasonable to us to object to a scientific paper on the ground
    that it has not accomplished something which the authors were not
    trying to accomplish: one does not criticize a paper on linear differen-
    tial equations for not also covering non linear differential equations.
    We are of the opinion, moreover, that as a preliminary to any adequate
    treatment of the mechanics of extended bodies,8 it is desirable (or
    perhaps even necessary) to present classical particle mechanics in a
    clear and precise form. In addition, such a presentation would be
    useful for an analysis of relativistic particle mechanics—and of contin-
    uum particle mechanics, both in classical and relativistic form.
                                               (quoted from [True.84, p.525])


   They are correct. If that were not the case, no axiomatic presentation of
classical propositional logic would be possible, on the grounds that it does
not cover classical quantified logic, for instance. Furthermore, an axiomatic
treatment of continuum mechanics, a topic addressed by Truesdell as lacking
in the approach by the three authors, was developed by Walter Noll, a
former student of Truesdell. It is interesting enough that Noll presented
three versions of such a theory, and the reasons would be questionable by
Truesdell’s criterion: should the first two not be enough to cover all contin-
uum mechanics? In this case, why Truesdell did not address similar restric-
tions to Noll’s work? Well, this is a question to historians, and we wish
just to point that these kind of criticisms to the axiomatic method are cer-
tainly misguided: Truesdell attacks the method by complaining about restric-
tions on the scope of content of the mechanics being axiomatized.
68 Criticism to the Axiomatic Method and its Defense
4.3   ARNOL’D AND THE BOURBAKI PROGRAM

The great Russian mathematician Vladimir Arnol’d famously made clear
his opinion about the axiomatic method in general and about Bourbaki’s
program of seeing mathematics as the science of structure, grounded in
that method [Arn.97]. Arnol’d was sanguine in criticizing AM and Bour-
baki, calling him “the devil” of a tendency, which had flourished in the be-
ginnings of the twentieth century (mainly due to Hilbert, he recalls for us),
of considering that AM should be propagated in mathematics.9 Arnol’d
considered this “a self-destructive democratic principle”, for it led mathe-
matics to depart from physics and the other sciences. The strict application
of this method, and surely he is referring here to what we have called ab-
stract axiomatics in the previous chapter, is that it turns any calculus into
a blind calculation, for the students are invited to acknowledge that the
multiplication of standard numbers is commutative even if they know
nothing about numbers.
   Arnol’d suggests that blind calculations should not substitute content
and that the intuition of the mathematician is something quite important
to be dismissed in favor of purely logical deductions. In this sense, he is
at least partially in agreement with Imre Lakatos and his criticism of for-
malization, claiming for intuitive mathematics. In our opinion, his under-
standing of the aims of the use of the axiomatic method are completely
misguided. We believe that no one, Hilbert and Bourbaki included, aimed
at substituting mathematics by blind calculations. Hilbert was right in pro-
posing that the use of formal methods has a finality: mainly to avoid that
‘intuitive’ elements not part of the theory play some decisive role in our de-
ductions. When such formalization efforts were launched, it was still very
fresh in everyone’s mind how geometric proofs were performed with the
aid of geometrical figures, introducing unallowed elements into the proof
(a typical well-known example is Euclid’s Proposition 1).10 The advantage
of using the AM is precisely this: to provide the mathematician with solid
grounds in the proofs. He or she knows what is being accepted, the
methods of deduction that are allowable by the underlying logic, and
then the kind of theorems he or she could obtain. Notice it was precisely
this kind of recognition of the importance of making explicit our underlying
assumptions that made possible intuitionistic mathematics, which does not
accept indirect proofs, or paraconsistent mathematics, where some kind of
‘contradictions’ are to be accepted.


4.4   WORTH AXIOMATIZE?

The advantage of the AM, as posed in the last paragraph, seems to be clear.
Once fully axiomatized, a theory becomes (at least in principle) a clear and
objective object of study. We can know which are its basic (primitive)
                   Criticism to the Axiomatic Method and its Defense         69
concepts, which are its fundamental laws (postulates), and if complete for-
malization is also considered, we can also know about its underlying logic.
The logical structure of the theory becomes completely clear, for good or
for bad. But perhaps one of the greatest possibilities opened up by formal-
ization and full employment of the axiomatic method was that of meta-
mathematical studies. During the twentieth century, as is well known,
due to the process of formalization (say of arithmetics, set theory, and
many other mathematical theories), we have gained a fine knowledge of
the theories and their limitations. Without such a process, there would
be no Gödel’s incompleteness theorems, no proof of the independence of
the continuum hypothesis and of the Axiom of Choice (hence, no ‘non-
Cantorian mathematics’ would be possible), no adequate distinction
between the theory’s language and its metalanguage with all the metalogical
consequences (for instance, about the concept of truth and all discussions
around it), and so on. But there is still a question to be answered: should
this technique be applied to all domains, to all sciences? That is, is it desir-
able, or should we take it as an ideal that every theory be formally axiom-
atized? Here we make a digression on this point and put a challenge,
suggesting that perhaps the axiomatic technique is not something to be
pursued in all domains. Let us see why by focusing on physics (we leave
out human sciences in general, where the answer seems to be no most of
the time, despite the advantages the AM may bring to these fields, as the
works of Suppes have shown).
   We shall focus on present-day physics of matter. Although we are not
specialists in this field, we think that we can say something on this
respect, at least from a philosophical and foundational points of view.
What is relevant for us is that such physics poses important concerns on
the axiomatic study of physics. By ‘present-day’ physics of matter we
mean the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. Roughly speaking,
SM is composed by some sub-theories: quantum electrodynamics (QED),
the theory of weak forces, and quantum chromodynamics (QCD). This
theory unifies three of the four fundamental forces of nature, namely, the
electromagnetic force, the weak force, and the strong force. Only gravita-
tion is left out of the picture. The mathematical description is in terms of
group theory; they are gauge theories, and we need to know their gauge
groups. The first two sub-theories are unified as what is known as the elec-
troweak theory, whose gauge group is termed SU(2) × U(1). It is not rele-
vant for us here to explain the details, but only to be aware of the
differences. The gauge group of QCD is SU(3). The problem is to find a
gauge group unifying all these groups. Some authors try to define the
group SU(3) × SU(2) × U(1), whose combination is the symmetry group
SU(5) [GlaGio.00]. The problem is that, until now, there was no agreement
about what SU(5) was, as Glashow tells us. In other words, until now there
is no consistent way of joining the electroweak theory with QCD. They
work as isolated pieces of a greater framework and are used depending
70 Criticism to the Axiomatic Method and its Defense
on the subject the scientist is interested in. But things are not so easy even
for these sub-theories. Let us follow some masters on the subject, Arthur
Jaffe and David Gross (Nobel Prize winner 2004).
   Gross suggests that QCD does not exist as a mathematical sound
theory [Cao.99, p.164]. Jaffe suggests that this is a question of time and
compares the issue with some results in mathematics, where there are
results not known in a time, but that were put out on a well-established
basis some time later. Gross doesn’t disagree and claims that the search
for a mathematically adequate basis is something that should be looked
for. His point concerned present-day physics, and both of them agree
that these fields are not yet well developed in regard to what concerns
foundational aspects.
   Thus we may conclude that, at least in the present moment, physical the-
ories form a mosaic composed of different sub-theories, which are used de-
pending on the field and on the particular problem being dealt with.
Furthermore, sometimes these sub-theories may be even incompatible one
with another, and even so, they constitute the mosaics of physics. Typical
examples, besides those mentioned in the previous paragraph, are the
quantum field theories (QFT—QED, QCD and the weak theory are
quantum field theories) and general relativity, which comprises the fourth
force, gravity. The attempts of joining the three forces with gravity
conduce to Quantum Gravity, the Holy Grail of present-day physics. But
Gross emphasizes also in his own paper in the book that an attempt to
make sense to QFT (in general) is still required [Gro.99]. The problem is
that we don’t have this general theory today.
   Well, should we search for such a unification in an axiomatic fashion?11
From the foundational point of view, of course the answer is yes. The fact
that we still do not have a fully developed unified theory may make at-
tempts at axiomatization premature, but that is not a conclusive argument.
Recall that one of the objections to the axiomatic method (by Hempel and
others, see a discussion in Suppe [Sup.77, pp.110–5]) is that it really only
predates a well-developed theory; the axiomatic method cannot work in a
vacuum. In fact, it can only order a field of knowledge where there is some-
thing reasonably well-developed in order to be ordered. So the objection
would go as follows: it is unreasonable to try to apply the axiomatic
method to those areas of physics yet.
   Our answer to those concerns comes from a balance between two ex-
tremes. We should obviously not force every field of knowledge into the
form of the axiomatic method; they may well not be ready for that. Axi-
omatization is not a mark of scientific status per se. Not even the Logical
Positivists were so rigid in their demands for formalization (see again
Lutz [Lut.12]). On the other hand, to claim that no benefits result from
the application of the axiomatic method would require a stubborn blind-
ness to the evidences we have already pointed out of how useful it may
be. Perhaps the best thing is to follow Halvorson [Hal.15, pp.2–3] and
                   Criticism to the Axiomatic Method and its Defense        71
allow that science itself determines which are the fields of scientific knowl-
edge that could profitably be axiomatized at a time. Scientific development
itself seems to indicate that a field is ready for axiomatization and that it
may be useful trying to axiomatize a theory. Obviously, this is as vague
an answer as it gets, but we would not like our philosophical preferences
to cause trouble for science.


4.5   DOES AXIOMATIZATION REALLY AXIOMATIZE?

The next question to be considered regarding the AM is about its results—
something that was already advanced in the introduction. More specifically,
the question is suppose we have an informal theory T, say Darwin’s evolu-
tion theory classical physics before Newton (Galileo, Kepler, and others),
but let us fix Darwin. Suppose now that we aim at axiomatizing his
theory. This was done by some people, such as Mary Williams
[Will.70]12 and many others since then. The question is does Williams’s
(or any other) system axiomatically capture Darwin’s theory? It will all
depend on how deep the idea of an axiomatic system capturing some infor-
mal theory goes. If such a capturing is understood as complete identification
between axiomatic and informal theory, then perhaps the answer is ‘no’, or,
at least, we cannot prove that. In our opinion, axiomatization and formal-
ization create something that certainly resembles the original theory, but
cannot be said to be that theory in the sense of identification. By axiomatiz-
ing T, we create T 0 and work as if T 0 were T; we get results in T 0 which are
interpreted in terms of T and so on. This remark is to be taken into account
in all that follows in this book.
   Even informal axiomatics, as we have seen, which is most of the time ad-
vanced in order to organize a certain field of knowledge known in advance,
and it is applied, as Lakatos and Hempel have suggested, only to ‘mature’
domains, surely leaves out much of the original theory, which has imprecise
and wide borderlines. Thus, in elaborating an axiomatic version of a certain
theory, the scientist has no way to assure us that the axiomatic system he or
she has obtained really corresponds to the informal domain he or she had
before. Let us make an analogy with a famous case. In recursion theory,
there is an important result known as Church thesis (or Church–Turing
thesis, referring to the American mathematician Alonso Church and the
British Alan Turing) which says that all computable functions are recursive.
In short, those functions defined on the natural numbers that are comput-
able in the informal sense (we can effectively get the outcomes given
some inputs) are formally computable, or recursive. Recursive functions
have a precise definition, which does not concern us here. It is generally ac-
cepted that recursive functions are computable, for they were defined pre-
cisely to play this role. The thesis says the converse and cannot be
formally proven, although some have tried. The reason is that we cannot
72 Criticism to the Axiomatic Method and its Defense
use the resources of logic to compare a formal concept (that of recursive
function) with an informal one (that of computable function). The point
is that the informal counterpart lacks adequate precision to be compared
with the concept analyzed on logical grounds. By the way, this is just one
of the roles of the axiomatic method, namely, to produce a framework
that can be analyzed in logical terms. The analogy is pertinent. In axioma-
tizing an informal field, such as Darwin’s natural selection, we get an axi-
omatic or a formal theory that may resemble the original one, but due to the
imprecision of the first, which in general has not had its basic concepts
clearly stated or defined, the equivalence of the two must be accepted as
a thesis, similar to Church’s. In other words, we need to postulate, in
general, grounded on the success of the axiomatic version in explaining
the informal field that the two theories fit. But there cannot be a proof of
this result.
   As for another example, we present the usually mentioned fact that we
can formulate Aristotle’s theory of categorical syllogism in the language
of first-order logic. It suffices to write the ‘A’ propositions (universal affir-
matives) as 8x(S(x) ! P(x)), where S and P are the subject and the predicate
terms, respectively, the ‘E’ propositions (universal negations) as 8x(S(x) !
:P(x)), the particular affirmatives (‘I’) as 9x(S(x) ^ P(x)), and the particular
negations (‘O’) as 9x(S(x) ^ :P(x)). For postulates, we can use the inference
rules derived from the first figure Barbara, Celari, Darii, and Ferio (or, more
economically, it is enough to take Barbara and Celarent, as is well known),
adequately translated to the logical notation. Have we succeed in ‘reducing’
syllogistic to first-order monadic predicate calculus? That is clearly doubt-
ful. This syllogistic theory, inspired in Aristotle and in further developers,
cannot be said to capture all the richness and complexity of the informal
discussion given in the Prior Analytics, for instance, in distinguishing ‘de-
monstrative premise’ from ‘dialectical premise’. The first one is either
true or false and has been obtained from initial assumptions, while the dia-
lectical one just poses a contradiction. In other words, the demonstrative
premises are the parts of a contradiction, while the dialectical ones are
just asking for the contradiction [Aris.89, 24a10, 24b10]. There are huge
difficulties in translating this to our present-day logical language. If by a
contradiction we understand the conjunction between a proposition and
its negation (what depends on the meaning of these connectives, that is,
of the logic involved), something like α ^ :α, then both α and :α would
be demonstrative premises, while the move to ask if this expression either
is or not a contradiction would be considered as dialectic. Of course this
discussion cannot be developed within such a poor formal theory.
    But these remarks do not entail that the axiomatization of a certain field
is not relevant, and let us insist on this point a little bit more. As a first
point, we would like to recall an earlier discussion. Recall that we
employ the axiomatic method either as a formal method or else as accord-
ing to Suppes’s suggestion, by devising a Suppes predicate. In both cases, we
                   Criticism to the Axiomatic Method and its Defense         73
are axiomatizing a field of knowledge characterizing a theory for certain
purposes. The fact that an axiomatized theory is a way of representing an
informal theory (as French [Fre.15] insists) for philosophical purposes
does not diminish its relevance. Philosophers have many intricate questions
about science that require some way to represent theories. We would like to
discuss what it means to say that a theory is true, or quasi-true, or that it is
empirically adequate, and so on. How can that be done with an informal
approach to theories? The axiomatic method helps us in discussing such
issues, not only for specific cases where axiomatization is available but
also in abstracto, by furnishing a general guideline of what a theory
would look like when an axiomatization eventually is developed. So in
this sense, a ‘rational reconstruction’ effected by the axiomatic method is
certainly something to be sought by philosophers too.
   As a second point, it is important once again to point to how useful the
AM may be for scientific purposes. Suppose again that we are dealing with
arithmetics. Without formalization, non-standard models would not
become available for investigation. The same can be said of several other
domains. Patrick Suppes emphasized the heuristic role of the axiomatic
method. As an example, he mentions the axiomatization of the field of real
numbers. As we have already mentioned, Suppes [Sups.83] says that Dede-
kind’s and Cauchy’s definitions of real numbers, respectively, by means of
cuts and by equivalence classes of Cauchy sequences, are not easy to compre-
hend and deal with. On the other hand, the axioms of a complete ordered
real field provide a useful mathematical device, and even the least-upper
bound axiom can be understood without difficulty.13 Kolmogorov’s
axioms for probability are the second example. According to Suppes, they
provide a clear and intuitive foundation for the concept of probability.
Thus a system of axioms is heuristic, according to Suppes, if they provide
an intuitive and organized way of looking to the involved concepts, organiz-
ing and facilitating “our thinking about the subject, and in particular our
ability to formulate, in an ordinary self-contained way, problems concerned
with the phenomena governed by the theory and their solutions” (op.cit.).
Non-heuristic axioms provide a “sophisticated mathematical foundation of
a discipline, but [they are] formulated in such a way they prohibit natural
and intuitive ways of thinking about problems, specially new problems in
the discipline” (ibid.). As an example, we recall that he mentions Mackey’s
axiomatics for orthodox quantum mechanics. We have no space to discuss
the details here, for which we recommend Suppes’s paper.
   The important point to be emphasized is, as we have suggested already,
that without axiomatization, and more, without formalization, we would
not be in a condition to notice that our room has some closed windows
which, once opened, show us new landscapes and even new universes.
This is true of the non-standard models of arithmetics, as we suggested,
but also with non-standard models of real numbers, the rise of hypersets,
obtained by dropping the axiom of foundation in set theory,14 the existence
74 Criticism to the Axiomatic Method and its Defense
of denumerable models of the first-order ZFC set theory (supposed consis-
tent), Gödel’s incompleteness theorems, Tarski’s theorem about the unde-
finability of the notion of truth, and so on. It is not absurd for sure to
suppose that the same new vistas may be opened with the axiomatic
study of empirical sciences, once adequately formalized. In this sense, axi-
omatization is indeed welcome. We leave this question for the reader to
think over as a challenge for the philosophical reflection, and advance
now to the topic of axiomatization of scientific theories properly speaking.



NOTES

   1. Textbooks in differential and integral calculus, analytic geometry, and many
      others are generally presented in an informal language, without axioms but
      only with definitions and theorems. But it is easy to note that these fields
      make part of a more detailed mathematical theories presented in an axiom-
      atic way. Furthermore, it is known from logic that every system given by pos-
      tulates can be transformed in another system described by nominal
      definitions only. The mentioned areas can be seen as described this way.
   2. Although that would be useful. In fact, how can a mathematician speak of
      proofs—and usually make several proofs in her training and teaching—
      without knowing what a proof is?
   3. Thus his celebrated formula P1 ! TT ! EE ! P2 [Pop.72, p.119/243].
   4. Today we know that the constant k in V  E þ F ¼ k is a topological invari-
      ant of the polyhedra of a kind. For instance, those where k ¼ 0 are the to-
      pological equivalent to a torus and to a sphere if k ¼ 2.
   5. Even though we should acknowledge that the notion of ‘most intuitive’ is
      vague and relative.
   6. Of course, in present-day mathematics, not all mathematical concepts can be
      developed within standard set theories; category theory is one such example.
      But such a claim depends on the set theory being considered; even category
      theory can be developed within strong set theories, for instance, those com-
      prising universes. By adding to ZFC a postulate saying that a Grothendieck
      universe exists, we get a new theory so strong that category theory can be
      developed within it [Low.14]. Universes entail the existence of inaccessible
      cardinals.
   7. Hamel said that the papers should not be published since the papers dealt
      only with “meager mechanics” of points, leaving aside, for instance, the
      problem of the continua — that is, the mechanics of the continuum, where
      deformations are considered.
   8. Recall that in particle mechanics, the particles are taken to be pontual,
      without dimensions.
   9. It is well known the claim made by Hilbert in his conference on the 23 Math-
      ematical Problems that “[t]he mathematician will have also to take into
      account not only of those theories coming near to reality, but also, as in ge-
      ometry, of all logically possible theories.” [Hilb.76, p.15]
  10. This proposition invites us to construct an equilateral triangle over a segment
      of line. The ‘proof’ assumes that two circles intersect, something that is quite
      ‘obvious’, but does not follow from the axioms.
  11. This question does not ask for Quantum Gravity, but for an axiomatic
      quantum gravity.
                 Criticism to the Axiomatic Method and its Defense               75
12. The use of the axiomatic method in biology was initiated by John Woodger
    in the 1930s.
13. This axiom is essential to characterize the structure, for it provides its topo-
    logical completeness.
14. Okay, you may say, these sets were already noted, for instance, by Mirima-
    nov in 1917, but the importance of von Neumann’s axiom of foundation
    cannot be ignored for the formulation of the intuitive notion of a set.
5     Axiomatization and Scientific
      Theories




Now that we have discussed axiomatization in general and the main fea-
tures of the axiomatic method, it is time to put that method to work in
the case of scientific theories. As discussed in a previous chapter, the fact
that we are using formal tools and axiomatization does not collapse our ap-
proach directly in the traditional Received View. Rather, as we shall discuss
later, we follow mainly the approach by Suppes and employ formal tools in
the analysis of scientific theories wherever possible.
   In this chapter, we shall proceed as follows. We begin by outlining what
we call an ‘external approach’ to axiomatization — that is, an approach in
which a theory is axiomatized along with all the mathematics required, in
particular, set theory. We then evaluate rather briefly its inadequacies in the
case of a treatment of the models of such theories. Basically, the main
problem comes to the fact that by axiomatizing huge portions of set
theory, an axiomatic system like that would have to have as models large
parts of models of set theory as well! As we shall discuss very briefly,
that is an impractical task for those willing to address philosophical prob-
lems concerning scientific theories (see our previous discussion).
   The next step then consists of presenting two distinct approaches
working inside set theory (recall that we have already mentioned that set
theory would be our framework), so we may call those approaches ‘internal
approaches’ to axiomatization. The first approach we shall present will be
called ‘da Costa–Chuaqui’s approach. It is based on the work of da Costa
and Chuaqui [CosChu.88] and da Costa and Rodrigues [Cos.07] and con-
sists of a formalization of the concept of a Suppes predicate, by employing
specific formal languages (the languages of the theory, or of their structures,
as we shall see) built inside the language of set theory to frame the axioms.
The second approach is the one by Suppes himself. It employs the language
of set theory itself to develop the axiomatization of a theory (see [Sups.57]
and [Sups.02]).
   Both approaches differ in many respects. In particular, both are attempts
to axiomatize a theory by selecting a class of models. However, their rela-
tions to models are very different, as we shall see, and the purposes for
which each analysis is used may vary. We shall discuss the benefits and
                                Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories      77
peculiarities of each approach, arguing in the end for a kind of pluralism in
this aspect: the philosopher of science is free to employ the most appropri-
ate analysis according to the needs of the day.


5.1   EXTERNAL AXIOMATIZATIONS

In the traditional debate between adherents of the so-called semantic
approach against the Received View, a very common argument presented
against the syntactical analysis of scientific theories concerns the nature
of axiomatization required by the Received View. As we have already dis-
cussed, the folklore supports the claim that the axiomatization must
proceed in first-order language with identity, by distinguishing a theoretical
and an observational vocabulary and by providing an interpretation by the
Correspondence Rules (cf. the standard exposition of the Received View in
the introduction of [Sup.77]). Of course, that view has by now been some-
what demystified (see [Lut.12]), even though this kind of reading is still not
widely known.
   A typical argument against the plausibility of the Received View ap-
proach concerns the axiomatization of theories requiring large portions
of mathematics, or even portions of set theory (this is a point advanced
by Suppes [Sups.67, p.58]). In an axiomatization of geometry, for instance,
one may need to use portions of set theory to deal with lines as sets of
points. In more mathematical theories, such as probability theory, one
may need the theory of real numbers. So axiomatization of those theories
would require that we axiomatize portions of set theory and all the math-
ematics needed. Of course, one option is to use the set theory to develop the
mathematics required, such as the theory of real numbers. Anyway, this
kind of approach is said to be too laborious, requiring the unpractical ax-
iomatization of all the relevant mathematics.
   As we mentioned, it is now recognized that it would be unfair to attribute
this view to the adherents of the Received View ([Lut.12] is very convincing
about that). However, that is not enough to prevent one from axiomatizing
theories according to that approach. In fact, Worrall [Wor.07, p.148] and
Zahar [Zah.04, p.7] seem to promote this kind of axiomatization through
their Ramsey approach to scientific theories. That is, their idea is that set
theory is involved in the axiomatization of a scientific theory in the sense
that one must either use set-theoretical notions in the axiomatization
(Worrall) or else axiomatize set theory as part of the work of axiomatizing the
theory itself (Zahar). So this is a live option for those adopting a syntactical
approach to theories and a version of epistemic structural realism. Given that
we are interested in the syntactical as well as in the semantic aspects
of theories, we shall present this approach with some care and argue that
it has serious shortcomings when it comes to dealing with its models.
Later, we then move on to what we believe are more appropriate approaches.
78 Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories
  According to the view being discussed, we can say that the axiomatic
basis of a theory T encompasses three levels of postulates:

   (i) The logical postulates–in general, it is said that these encompass only
       those postulates of classical first-order logic with identity. But in the
       general setting, we could also use higher-order logics, infinitary lan-
       guages or logics, or still other non-classical logics.
  (ii) A group of ‘mathematical’ postulates–in general, postulates for first-
       order ZFC or, as Zahar prefers, NBG (von Neuman-Bernays-Gödel
       set theory, see [Men.97, chap.4]). Perhaps only a small part of ZFC
       is to be used, say Zp, the ‘pure’ Zermelo set theory (but without Ure-
       lemente, although these entities may be interesting in empirical sci-
       ences to represent things that are not sets) plus the Axiom of
       Choice. The question of inquiring how much of set theory physical
       theories demand is still open and, of course, depends on the theory.
       But some mathematicians think that replacement axioms are not nec-
       essary and that only the denumerable form of the Axiom of Choice is
       enough.
 (iii) The specific postulates–these postulates depend on the particular field
       being axiomatized. According to this scheme, these postulates would
       be sentences of the language of ZFC, perhaps enriched by additional
       concepts and terms referring to the supposed domain of investigation.
       In the case of the Received View, the specific vocabulary would still
       need to be separated into theoretical terms and observational terms.

    The notion of deduction is that the underlying logic, in general, is in ac-
cordance (when no other logical symbols are introduced) with elementary
(first-order) logic, but now in the deductions we may have axioms of
ZFC as premises, so the logic is not ‘exactly’ elementary, as is necessary
for the consideration of higher-order theories and languages typical of scien-
tific theories. Indeed, in first-order set theory, the intended interpretation
regards the individual variables as representing sets, viewed as collections
of objects, which by their turn can also be sets. Since in extensional contexts
we can read a set as being the extension of a property (the property shared
just by the elements of the set), ‘to belong to a set’ stands for ‘to have a
property’, so in quantifying over sets, we are quantifying both over individ-
uals and properties. It is in this sense that set theory acts as a higher-order
language, despite being (in most cases) formulated as a first-order theory.
    For example, consider an axiomatization of classical particle mechanics.
According to the approach here proposed, it would consist of an
axiomatization for first-order logic, axioms for set theory, and, finally, in
the third stage, axioms for classical particle mechanics. Notice that in for-
mulating such axioms we may employ concepts of mathematics, such
as vector spaces, real numbers and functions of real numbers. All those
concepts may be developed inside set theory in the second level of the
                               Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories     79
axiomatization. Surely this provides for a powerful ‘mathematical basis’ for
a scientific theory by allowing all classical mathematics available. However,
this approach to scientific theories also has its drawbacks.
   What are the main difficulties with this kind of approach? Well, as we
have seen earlier, ZFC (if consistent) cannot provide for its own models.
So besides being an awkward approach for axiomatization, this form of pre-
sentation of theories is also unduly laborious for those willing to take into
account the models of the theory: we will have to employ a stronger metathe-
ory in which the models of ZFC (or whichever set theory we happen to be
employing) are developed. So, for instance, whenever we are interested in
particle mechanics or quantum mechanics, say, we will have to take into
account not only the models of the specific axioms for those theories but
also huge structures modeling the axioms of set theory. That goes beyond
what any philosopher of science would be willing to take into account.
   Perhaps some simpler approach that employs set theory but does not
require a model of it could be more plausible. Let us check the alternatives.
Before presenting the approaches, let us introduce the terminology that will
guide us; it is common to both the Suppes approach as well as the da Costa–
Chuaqui approach.


5.2   STRUCTURES

We shall be working within first-order ZFC set theory. In this section, we
follow the approach presented in [Cos.07] but differently from the exposi-
tion there. We allow that the domain of the structures can be composed of
more than one set and allow other simplifications that will be explained
later.
   Within ZFC, we can, at least in principle, construct particular structures
for mathematics and for empirical sciences—sometimes we may need to
strengthen ZFC, say with universes (which enable us to also deal with cat-
egory theory, although we shall be restricted here to set-theoretical struc-
tures). As we shall see, the language of ZFC, termed L2 , taken here to be
a first-order language, is so powerful that by using it, we construct lan-
guages that are not first-order and structures that are not order–1 structures
(these definitions shall be introduced in what follows). To go into some
detail, we need to introduce a few basic definitions we present in the next
sections. A remark is in order here: we usually work with extensions by def-
initions of the language of set theory, comprising defined symbols such as 
(for set inclusion), @0, and so on. But we shall continue to speak of the lan-
guage of set theory also for these extensions.
   The general idea can be seen with an analogy with group theory. Starting
with a non-empty set G, by using the set-theoretical operations, we obtain
PðG  G  GÞ, and then we may choose an element of this set (which is a
set whose elements are collections of 3-tuples of elements of G), satisfying
80 Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories




Figure 5.1 The well-founded ‘model’ V ¼ hV; 2i of ZFC, a structure A built within
ZFC, and the scale ε(D) based on the domain D. For details, see the text




the required properties (the group axioms of course).1 The corresponding
structures (namely, the groups) are order–1 structures.
   Summing up, what we are going to see is that a mathematical structure,
such as those used in mathematics and in the empirical sciences, can be con-
structed within a set theory such as ZFC (with or without ur-elements).
Figure 5.1 provides a schema of this situation, using ‘pure’ set theory
(without ur-elements) with an axiom of foundation, as in standard first-
order ZFC. It should be remarked that while the structure A (to be
defined soon) is a set, the whole universe V is not, as we have seen in the
last chapter.
   Our first definition is of the set T of types. These types are not to be con-
fused with the types of Russell’s Simple Type Theory. This set will be im-
portant also for the development of formal languages. We shall need to
make explicit the da Costa–Chuaqui approach in the next sections. When
we speak of the set of types, we always mean the set T given by the follow-
ing definition:

Definition 5.2.1 (TYPES) The set T of types is the least set satisfying the fol-
lowing conditions:

  (a) 0, 1, . . . , n, with 0  n < ω, are types. These are the types of indi-
      viduals, where ω is the first transfinite ordinal.
  (b) if a1 ; . . . ; an 2 T, then ha1 ; . . . ; an i 2 T, 1  n < ω.
                                     Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories             81
Thus, for instance, 0, . . . , n1, h0i, h0,0i, h0,1i, hh3i, 7i, hh0ii are types. In-
tuitively speaking, in this list we have types for the individuals of the basic
sets, that is, the sets that form the domains of the structures, as we shall see
soon. Thus the types just exemplifyed stand for sets (or properties) of individ-
uals whose elements have type 0 for binary relations on individuals of the
same set for relations between the sets whose elements have types 0 and 1,
respectively; for binary relations between sub-collections of the set whose in-
dividuals have type 3 and the set whose individuals have type 7; and, finally,
for sets whose elements are subsets of the set whose elements have type 0.

Definition 5.2.2 (ORDER OF A TYPE) The order of a type, OrdðtÞ, is defined as
follows:

  (a) OrdðkÞ ¼ 0, for k ¼ 0, . . . ,n, with 0  n < ω.
  (b) Ordðha1 ; . . . ; an iÞ ¼ max fOrdða1 Þ; . . . ; Ordðan Þg þ 1.

   Thus, for instance, Ordðh0iÞ ¼ Ordðhk1 ; k2 iÞ ¼ 1, with k1,k2 2 {0, . . . , n},
while Ordðhk1 ; hk2 iiÞ ¼ 2. Relations will be understood here extensionally
(collections of n-tuples) and be of finite rank (that is, having finite elements
only). Unary relations are sets.

Definition 5.2.3 (ORDER OF A RELATION) The order of a relation is the order
of its type.
   Thus binary relations of individuals are order-1 relations and so on.
For instance, a binary relation on D is an element of tðhk1 ; k2 iÞ ¼
Pðtðk1 Þ  tðk2 ÞÞ ¼ PðDk1  Dk2 Þ. According to definition 5.2.3, the type
of binary relation on Dk is hk,ki, as intuitively expected.
   These definitions will be useful in our discussions to come, when we shall
need to talk about the order of a structure and the order of a language. The
following definitions help us to construct relations and properties based on
{Dn}, a non-empty family of sets, each one with elements of a type, which
will soon be called the domains of the structure. We write Dn for the nth
member of that family. In the next definition, the usual set-theoretical op-
erations of power set and Cartesian product are being used, denoted, re-
spectively, by “×” and “P”.
   We shall introduce a function π as follows:

Definition 5.2.4 (SCALE BASED ON {DN}) Let {Dn} ¼ {D1, D2, . . . , Dn} a family
of non-empty sets whose elements have types t1, . . . , tn, respectively. Then,
we define a function π, called a scale based on {Dn} with T as its domain,
recursively, as follows:

  (a) π(tk) ¼ Dk (k ¼ 1, . . . , n).
  (b) If a1 ; . . . ; an 2 T, then pðha1 ; . . . ; an iÞ ¼ Pðpða1 Þ  . . .  pðan ÞÞ.
82 Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories
  (c) The scale based on {Dn} is the union of the range of π(τ), with t 2 T
      and it is denoted by ε({Dn}).

   Let us give an example. Since a binary operation on a set G (as the group
operation) can be seen as a ternary relation on G, we can deal with it as
follows. Having the scale ε(G) (here the family of sets has just one
element, the set G, and let t be its type), we just take an element of
pðht; t; tiÞ ¼ PðD  D  DÞ satisfying well-known conditions (the group
postulates written in this ‘relational’ notation). In this sense, it can be
shown that we can map Bourbaki’s echelon construction schema [Bou.68,
chap.4] within this schema.

Definition 5.2.5 The cardinal KDn associated to ε({Dn}) is defined as
               (               !            !       )
                [n        [n       2 [ n      
                      
    KDn ¼ sup  Dk ; P            
                                Dk ; P           
                                              D k ; . . . :
                     k¼1           k¼1           k¼1

         Sn                                            Sn
Here j    k¼1   Dk j denotes the cardinal of the set    k¼1   Dk .

Definition 5.2.6 (STRUCTURE) A structure E based on a family {Dn} is a n þ
1-tuple

    E ¼ hD1 ; . . . ; Dn ; Ri i;                                           ð5:1Þ

where Di ¼ 6 ; and Rι represents a sequence of relations of degree n belonging
to ε({Dn}). These relations are called the primitive elements of the structure.
   Here Rι is a sequence of elements of ε({Dn}), and we suppose that the
domain of this sequence is strictly less than KDn. We say that KDn is the car-
dinal associated with E and that ε({Dn}) is the scale associated with E.
   As we said before, each element of ε({Dn}) has a certain type, for it
belongs to π(t) for some t 2 T. Now, as we have seen, the order of a relation
is defined as the order of its type. The order of E, denoted OrdðEÞ, is the
order of the greatest of the types of the relations of the family Rι, if there
is one, and if there is no such relation, we put OrdðEÞ ¼ o. Usually, the re-
lations of Rι have as relata the elements of the basic sets, but more general
structures enable that the relata can also be higher-order individuals, that is,
sets of elements of Di, sets of sets of these elements, and so on.
   In the beginning of this section, we remarked that our presentation makes
some simplifications on [Cos.07]. Here we depart from da Costa’s original
work in that we allow individuals and operations to occur in the structure,
whereas da Costa reduced operations to relations and identified individuals
with their unit sets. The main point of this change is to simplify the exposi-
tion, and from a mathematical point of view, the difference is purely a matter
of convention.2 So, in the definition of structures, the objects in the family Rι
may not only be relations, but operations as well — that is, relations
                                 Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories   83
satisfying the well-known functional condition, or even distinguished ele-
ments from the domain, which we take to be 0ary operations. In these
cases, we employ as usual the common notation for functions and objects.
   Let us give some examples with due simplifications in the notation. For
instance, a structure such as
      K ¼ hK; þ; ; 0; 1i                                               ð5:2Þ

can be used for representing fields, where K is a non-empty set, þ and  are
two binary operations on K, and 0,1 2 K. Postulates for fields are added to
this description. For vector spaces over a field K, we may write
V ¼ hV; K; þV ; V ; þK ; K i, where V is the set of vectors K is a set, the
domain of a field þV is a binary operation on V, called addition of vectors
V is a function from K×V in V, the multiplication of vector by scalar þK is
a binary operation on K, the addition of scalars and K a binary operation
on K, the multiplication of scalars. All these concepts are subjected to well-
known postulates. For simplicity, we usually omit the reference to field oper-
ations, leaving them presupposed in saying that K is a field, and write simply
      V ¼ hV; K; þ; i:                                                 ð5:3Þ

   More sophisticated structures suitable for representing theories in the
empirical sciences, as we shall see in what follows, follow the same
schema. For instance, as we shall see, a structure for classical particle me-
chanics is of the form
      M ¼ hP; T; m; s; f ; gi;

where P is a non-empty set, T is an interval of the real number line, m is a
function from P to the set of non-negative reals, and the remaining concepts
are suitable functions we shall see again later in this chapter. Surely the
reader acknowledges that, with some effort, this structure can be composed
according to the aforementioned definitions.


5.3    LANGUAGES AND ALGEBRAS

We now present the approach to axiomatization based on the development
of da Costa and Chuaqui [CosChu.88]. This work is an attempt to formal-
ize the idea of the Suppes predicate, employing formal languages and char-
acterizing a class of models by employing formal axioms. By a Suppes
predicate we mean a set-theoretical predicate in the lines of Suppes, but,
as we shall see, there are some differences in the definition and the way
Suppes uses it. Now we shall discuss an approach to formal languages
that will make use of the notion of structure just developed. Here languages
will be seen as a special kind of structure: a free-algebra. Our aim is to
84 Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories
develop some languages as the language of simple type theory, but before
doing that, first we recall some useful concepts of Universal Algebra.

Definition 5.3.1 Let Rι be a family of n-ary relations over sets whose elements
have types t1, . . . , tn, and let D1, . . . , Dn be a family of sets whose elements
have types t1, . . . , tn, respectively. Thus the relations are relations over these
sets by hypothesis. Let us consider the structure E ¼ hD1 ; . . . ; Dn ; Ri i. The
similarity type, or signature, of this structure is a n-tuple ha1, . . . ,ani,
where the ai are the types of relations in the structure.
   For instance, a structure for group theory can be taken as G ¼ hG; ; ; ei
(as we shall see below). Here  is a binary operation over G (hence a ternary
relation on G,  is a mapping from G to G and e 2 G. Hence the type of
similarity of the structure is hh0, 0, 0i, h0, 0i, 0i.
   We say that two structures have the same similarity type when the n-tuple
ha1, . . . , ani of types is equal for both; that is, their relations have the same
type and the family in the domain is composed of the same number of ele-
ments. Since a family is always ordered, the same type of relations always
occur in the same order when the structures have the same similarity type.
A structure for fields is of the similarity hh0, 0, 0i, h0, 0, 0i, 0, 0i, and so on.
   Here we shall use a notion of algebra to mean mainly a structure com-
posed by a set (the domain of the algebra) and a collection of operations
and/or distinguished elements of the domain, according to the standard
use in Universal Algebra [BarMac.75, p.2]. Thus, being s ¼ ha1, . . . , ani
as noted earlier, a n-tuple of types, we have:

Definition 5.3.2 A s-algebra A is a structure hD1, . . . , Dn, Rιi such that
OrdðRi Þ  1 for each i, and A has similarity type s.
   The restriction to order-1 or less serves to make each s-algebra an
algebra in the usual sense — that is, a set with a family of operations
and/or distinguished elements defined over this set and distinguished ele-
ments taken from the domain.
   The definitions that follows will concentrate on structures having a sole
domain for simplicity. The general case can be obtained by extending the
mappings to all the sets of the domain, if there are many, by a procedure
similar to one given by Bourbaki [Bou.68, chap.4]. More general structures,
as those we have been mentioning, will appear again soon.

Definition 5.3.3 (HOMOMORPHISM BETWEEN ALGEBRAS) Let A, B be s-algebras
with A ¼ hA; Ri i and B ¼ hB; R0i i. A homomorphism from A into B is a
function φ: A 7! B such that, for all Ri of the s-algebra A whose type is
ha1, . . . , aki,

    φðRi ðx1 ; . . . ; xk ÞÞ ¼ R0i ðφðx1 Þ; . . . ; φðxk ÞÞ:
                                 Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories       85




Figure 5.2 Free algebras: φ  σ ¼ α; that is, the diagram commute



    Let us give an example using groups. Suppose two groups G ¼ hG; i and
G 0 ¼ hG0 ; 0 i. A homomorphism from G into G 0 is a function φ: G 7! G0 such
that, for every a,b 2 G, we have

    φða  bÞ ¼ φðaÞ 0 φðbÞ:

    A homomorphism between two vector spaces W and W0 over the same
field is a linear transformation from W to W0 .

Definition 5.3.4 (ISOMORPHISM) Let A, B be s-algebras and φ: A 7! B a ho-
momorphism. If φ is a bijection, we say that it is an isomorphism between
the algebras.

Definition 5.3.5 (FREE ALGEBRA) 3 Let X be any set, let F be a s-algebra with
domain F, and let σ : X ! F be a function. We say that hF,σi (also, for sim-
plicity, denoted by F) is a free s-algebra on the set X of free generators if, for
every s-algebra A and function α: X ! A, there exists a unique homomor-
phism φ: F ! A such that φσ ¼ α.

   Figure 5.2 intends to clarify the definition using a simpler notation.

Theorem 5.3.1 For any set X and any similarity type s, there exists a free s-
algebra on X. This free s-algebra on X is unique up to isomorphism.
   We shall not prove this theorem here (but see [BarMac.75]). Now we
pass to the development of languages properly, which will be considered
as specific free s-algebras as presented earlier.
   Let us suppose a simple case to exemplify how can we see what a lan-
guage is from an algebraic point of view. In order to make the ideas
clear, we shall consider an example in parallel by using the language of clas-
sical propositional logic, LCPL .
86 Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories
   Thus suppose we have a set X ¼ {xi}i2I (this set may be infinite) and
another set fλ whose elements will be denoted generically by f. We shall
use for this set the same notation we used earlier to define an algebra. This
second set plays the role of the operations of the algebra we shall define.
In our sample case, X ¼ {p0, p1, . . .} is the set of propositional variables,
and fλ ¼ {:, !} are the propositional connectives (we could use any adequate
set of connectives, of course). We still suppose that there is a mapping
ar : fl !
        7 o, the arity function, which assigns a natural number to each
element of fλ, called its arity. For instance, arð:Þ ¼ 1 and arð!Þ ¼ 2.
   Now we define, by induction, a set F as follows:

  (1) F0 :¼ X [ fhf ; x1 ; x2 ; . . . ; xarðf Þ i : f 2 fl ^ xi 2 Xg. This is the set of
      the atomic formulas. The (ðarðf Þ þ 1Þ-tuple hf ; x1 ; x2 ; . . . ; xarðf Þ i is
      written fx1 x2 . . . xarðf Þ . In our example, the atomic formulas are the
      propositional variables and the expressions of both forms :pi and
      !pipj. This last one may be abbreviated by pi ! pj.
  (2) Now let αi, i ¼ 1, . . . denote atomic formulas. Then the set of complex
      formulas is F1 ¼ fhf ; a1 ; a2 ; . . . ; aarðf Þ i : f 2 fl ^ ai 2 F1 g, and again
      the tuples are abbreviated by f a1 a2 . . . aarðf Þ . For instance, in our
      example we may have as complex formulas expressions such as
      ::pi, ! :p1 ! p2:p3. The last one is abbreviated by :p1 ! (p2
      ! :p3) according to a standard notation. In our case study, we can
      introduce other operational symbols by definition, such as the other
      standard connectives ^, _ and $.
  (4) In a general way, let Fn :¼ fhf ; a1 ; a2 ; . . . ; aarðf Þ i : f 2 fl ^ ai 2 Fn1 g
      and then
           S
  (5) F ¼ n2o Fn .

   We can prove that A ¼ hF ; fl i is a free algebra by adapting the proof
given in [BarMac.75, p.5]. Thus, the language of the classical propositional
calculus is a free algebra with @0 generators.
   We call a free algebra constructed this way a language. Thus we can see
how a language can be constructed in ZFC. The cases of first-order usual
languages, higher-order languages, and even infinitary languages can be
treated the same way, although they will demand more details. Anyway,
they can be treated as being certain free algebras. Thus when we mention
certain languages to speak of structures in the next section, they can be con-
sidered as constructed within ZFC.


5.4   LANGUAGES FOR SPEAKING OF STRUCTURES

Our goal is to speak of structures and of all the objects of a scale. To do that
in an adequate way, we consider two basic infinitary languages, termed
Looo ðRÞ (or simply Lo ðRÞ) and Look ðRÞ[CosRod.07].
                                      Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories             87
                                               Z
    In general, an infinitary language L , with κ < μ being infinite cardinals
                                               mk
and 1  η  ω, enables us to consider conjunctions and disjunctions of n  μ
formulas and blocks of quantifiers with m < κ many quantifiers. The super-
script η indicates the order of the language (first-order, second-order, etc.). In
both cases R is the set of the constants of the language. Thus in Lomo ðRÞ (ω <
μ) we may have infinitely many conjunctions and disjunctions of formulas,
but blocks of quantifiers with finitely many quantifiers only. Looo ðRÞ is a
higher-order language, suitable for type theory (higher-order logic). Standard
first-order languages are of the kind L1oo then so is L2 .

Definition 5.4.1 (ORDER OF A LANGUAGE) A language Lnmk , with 1  n < ω, is
called a language of order n. A language Lomk is said to be of order ω.

    A language of order n contains only types of order t  n and quantifica-
tion of variables of types having order  n  1 [CosRod.07].
    In order to exemplify how we can define a higher-order language using a
first-order language (such as L2 ), let us sketch the language Loo1 o ðRÞ, but we
could consider whatever infinitary language Lomk , provided that the involved
cardinals exist in ZFC (for instance, we couldn’t use an inaccessible
cardinal).4
    The primitive symbols of Loo1 o ðRÞ are the following ones:5
                                            V       W
   (i) Sentential connectives: :, ^, _, !, , and .
  (ii) Quantifiers: 8 and 9.
 (iii) For each type t, a family of variables of type t whose cardinal is ω.
 (iv) Primitive relations: for any type t, a collection of constants of that
       type (possibly some of them may be empty). The collection of these
       constants forms the set R.
  (v) Parentheses: left and right parentheses (‘(’ and ‘)’) and comma (‘,’).
 (vi) Equality: ¼ t of type t ¼ ht1,t2i, with t1 and t2 of the same type.

   Variables and constants of type t are terms of that type. If T is a term of
type ht1, . . . , tni and T1, . . . ,Tn are terms of types t1, . . . , tn, respectively, then
T(T1, . . . , Tn) is an atomic formula. If T1 and T2 are terms of the same type t,
then T1 ¼ ht1,t2i T2 is an atomic formula. We shall write T1 ¼ T2 for this last
formula, leaving the type of the identity relationVimplicit. W            If α, β, αi are for-
mulas (i ¼ 1,. . .), then :α, α ^ β, α _ β, α ! β, αi, and αi are formulas.
Then we are able to write formulas with denumerably many conjunctions
and disjunctions. Furthermore, if X is a variable of type t, then 8Xα and
9Xα are also formulas (and only finite blocks of quantifiers are allowed).
These are the only formulas of the language. The concepts of free and
bound variables and other syntactic concepts can be introduced as usual.
   Now let E ¼ hD; ri i be a structure, where Rι 2 R — that is, the primitive
relations of the structure — are chosen among the constants of our language
Loo1 o ðRÞ. Then, Loo1 o ðRÞ can be taken as a language for E ¼ hD; ri i, provided
88 Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories
that κD ¼ ω (recall that κD is the cardinal associated to E). Still working
within (say) ZFC, we can define an interpretation of Loo1 o ðRÞ in E ¼
hD; ri i in an obvious way so that what we mean by a sentence S of
Loo1 o ðRÞ (a formula without free variables) is true in such a structure in
the Tarskian sense; that is,
    E        S:                                                              ð5:4Þ

   In the same vein, we can define the notion of validity. A sentence S is
valid, and we write
        S;

if E S for every structure E.
   It is important to emphasize that we are describing the language Loo1 o ðRÞ
using the resources of some set theory such as ZFC. This way, we can speak
of denumerable many variables, for instance, in a precise way. In this sense,
any symbol of Look ðRÞ, as we have remarked already, can be seen as a name
for a set. Thus ‘(’ (the left parenthesis), for example, names a set, as do all
other symbols of the language.


5.4.1 The Language of a Structure
In this section, we relate both proposals made earlier: the theory of structures
and the language of types seen as a free algebra. An interesting discussion in
the philosophy of mathematics and foundations is whether there is a most
natural language associated with a given structure. According to our ap-
proach, associated with every structure E there will be a language that is
the one in which we will talk about the elements of the structure, having
as constant symbols exactly one symbol for each relation occurring in the
structure, with both the symbol and the corresponding relation being of the
same type. As we said before, given a structure E, to build one language
for this structure we consider OrdðEÞ and restrict ourselves to terms of this
order or less. Also, the set X of generators of the free algebra will be restricted
accordingly; that is, in building the language as a free algebra, the generators
will be the atomic formulas built from the symbols available to us.
   As a consequence of this discussion, the languages in which we can treat
more adequately the elements of a structure are the languages £ such that
OrdðEÞ  Ordð£).6 So, for example, in first-order structures, we must use
at least first-order languages. To consider a simple example, let’s take
group theory, which deals with groups (first-order structures). These struc-
tures, according to the approach adopted in this work, are most naturally
treated by second-order languages, for we must talk about subgroups and
quantify over subsets of the domain. That does not mean that it is impos-
sible or not fruitful to use first-order languages; in fact, the work is com-
monly done in first-order language, as when we use set theory to develop
                               Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories      89
group theory, or other mathematical theories such as well-ordered struc-
tures or Dedekind-complete fields, theories that are not first-order (see dis-
cussion in [Kun.09, pp. 89, 90]).
   There is a heated debate on this topic in the philosophy and foundations
of mathematics. Should we restrict ourselves to first-order languages or
should we adopt higher-order languages? We shall not enter into the
dispute here (for a defense of second-order logic in these contexts, see,
for example, Shapiro in [Sha.91]). The general approach followed in our
work suggests that a pluralist view can be fruitfully pursued: it is fruitful
to explore higher-order languages as well as first-order languages; one
must recognize that some kinds of structures are more naturally dealt
with by using higher-order languages. In fact, the reader may even
wonder whether the problem of a ‘better’ language for certain mathemati-
cal theories is a legitimate one (for agnosticism about this problem, see
Hodges [Hod.01, pp. 71–3]).
   Having a language with which we can talk about the elements of E, it is
now simple to define for this language the notions of the structure modeling
a sentence α of the language, that is, E a, as well as other semantical
notions, but we will not do that here.
   So, taking the terminology introduced before this sub-section, let E ¼
hD; Ri i be a structure, while rngðRi Þ denote the range of Rι. Remember
that Rι stands for a sequence of relations of the scale ε(D); that is, it is a
mapping from a finite ordinal into a collection of relations in the scale.
Thus rngðRi Þ stands for just the set of these relations. So Looo ðrngðRi ÞÞ 
ð¼ Lo ðrngðRi ÞÞÞ is the basic language of the structure (it is not the only
one, for other stronger languages encompassing it could be used instead).
In this case, we can interpret a sentence containing constants in rngðRi Þ
in E ¼ hD; Ri i and define the notion of truth for sentences of this language
according to this structure in an obvious way.
   Digression–For certain applications in science, sometimes it is better to
consider partial relations as the primitive relations of a certain structure.
A relation (say, a binary one) R on a set A is partial if there are situations
where we cannot assert either aRb or :(aRb) (see [CosFre.03] for all the
philosophical discussion on this topic). In this case, the notion of truth is
changed to partial truth, a concept that generalizes Tarski’s approach and
seems to be more adequate for empirical sciences. But we shall not touch
this point here (but see [CosFre.03]).


5.5   DEFINABILITY AND EXPRESSIVE ELEMENTS

Now we wish to understand when an object of a scale ε(D) is definable in a
structure E ¼ hD; ri i by a formula of Lo ðrngðri ÞÞ either when an element of
the scale is expressible in the structure with respect to a sequence of objects
of the scale.
90 Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories
Definition 5.5.1 (DEFINABILITY OF A RELATION) Let R be a relation of type t ¼
ht1, . . . , tni and E ¼ hD; ri i a structure. We say that R is definable in E if
there exists a formula F(x1, x2, . . . , xn) of Lo ðrngðri ÞÞ whose only free var-
iables are x1, . . . , xn of types t1, . . . , tn, respectively, such that in
Lo ðrngðri ÞÞ [ fRg, the formula
    8x1 . . . 8xn ðRðx1 ; . . . ; xn Þ $ Fðx1 ; x2 ; . . . ; xn ÞÞ

is true in ε(D).

   For instance, for each type t we can define an identity relation ¼ t as
follows. Let Z be a variable of type hti and then we can easily see that
for suitable structures and scales, the following is true:
    9!It 8x8yðIt ðx; yÞ $ 8ZðZðxÞ $ ZðyÞÞÞ:

   We may call It the identity of type t and write x ¼ t y for It(x,y), what
intuitively means that identity is defined by Leibniz Law, as usual: just
re-write the aforementioned definition as follows:
    x ¼t y :¼ 8ZðZðxÞ $ ZðyÞÞ:

Usually, we suppress the index t and write just x ¼ y, leaving the type im-
plicit (= is of type ht, ti, while x and y are both of type t). This kind of defin-
ability, which involves structures and scales, is called semantic definability,
and goes back to Tarski.
   Here is another example. Suppose the language L2 of ‘pure’ set theory
ZF. As is well known, this language has 2 as its only non-logical constant.
If we attempt to define the subset relation , we can do it in the extended
language L2 [{} by showing that the formula
    8x8yðx  y $ 8zðz 2 x ! z 2 yÞÞ

is true in any structure built in ZF. In that which follows, we shall give some
further examples.
    Another important case is the next one, also involving a semantic defin-
ability.

Definition 5.5.2 (DEFINABILITY OF AN OBJECT) Let us take E ¼ hD; ri i, ε(D),
and Lo ðrngðri ÞÞ as noted earlier. Given an object a 2 ε(D) of type t, we
say that it is Lo ðrngðri ÞÞ-definable or definable in the strict sense in E ¼
hD; ri i if there is a formula F(x) in the only free variable x of type t such that
    E     8xðx ¼t a $ FðxÞÞ:                                                 ð5:5Þ

   The case of the well-ordered set on the reals, mentioned earlier, shows
that, taking into account the last definition, the least element of (0,1)
                                 Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories       91
cannot be definable by a formula. Let us consider a ‘positive’ example. Let
N ¼ ho; þ; ; s; 0i be an order–1 structure for first-order arithmetics. In
order to define a natural number (any one) we need just a finitary language,
say Looo ðRÞ with R ¼ fþ; ; 0; sg. Then it is easy to see that (in an obvious
abbreviated notation)
    N    8xðx ¼ n $ x ¼ ss . . . sð0ÞÞ:

If we consider a suitable infinitary language, say Lo1 o (where we can admit
denumerable infinite conjunctions and disjunctions), we can insert inside
the parentheses the formula we abbreviate as follows:
    x 2 o $ x ¼ 0 _ x ¼ 1 _ ... ;                                           ð5:6Þ

which permits us to define not a particular natural number, but the notion
of ‘being a natural number’. An important remark: the expression (5.6) is
not a formula strictly speaking (for the dots do not make part of the lan-
guage), but abbreviates a formula of Lo1 o .
    An illustrative case is the following one. We know that within ZFC (sup-
posed consistent), the set R of the reals is not denumerable. This means that
we cannot find a mapping (a set in ZFC) that maps the reals onto the natural
numbers. Thus, using standard denumerable languages, we do not have suf-
ficient names for the reals—for instance, we can use each of the reals to name
itself. But if we use a suitable infinitary language Lmk (for suitable ordinals μ
and κ) we can find a name for each real, so we can define all of them by the
condition given in definition 5.5.2. This shows that definability and other
related concepts depend on the employed language.
    Here is another interesting case related to the aforementioned defini-
tions. Using the Axiom of Choice, we can show that every set is well
ordered (by the way, this statement is equivalent to the Axiom of
Choice). For instance, the set ω of natural numbers is well ordered by the
usual less-than relation . We can define the usual order  as follows:7 a
 b≔ 9c(b ¼ a þ c). The usual order relation, however, does not well
order the set Z of the whole integers, for the subset {. . . ,2, 1, 0}, for in-
stance, has not a least element. But if we order Z by writing it as
{0, 1, 1, 2, 2, . . .}, then it is well ordered by this order, termed 1,
which can be defined by a 1 b ≔ (|a| < |b|) _ (|a| ¼ |b| ^ a  b), where
 is the usual order relation and < is defined as a < b ≔ a  b ^ a 6¼ b.
    Obviously, the ‘usual’ relation (defined on R) does not well order the set of
reals (for instance, an open set (a, b), with a < b, has not a least element). But
can we find a well-order on such a set? According to the Axiom of Choice,
we can assume that this order does exist, since its existence is consistent
with ZFC (supposed consistent). The problem is that it can be proven that
the ZFC axioms (plus the so-called generalized continuum hypothesis) are
not sufficient to show that this order can be definable by a formula of its lan-
guage.8 In the same vein, we cannot define the least element of a certain
92 Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories
subset of reals (say, the open interval (0, 1)) in the sense of definition 5.5.2.
All of this shows that the notions of definability and expressibility, among
others, depend on the language and on the theory we are assuming.


5.6   ON THE NEW SYMBOLS

In our formalization of ZFC, we have used individual constants to facilitate
our mentioning of certain particular sets, for in doing that, we would have a
denumerable set of ‘names’ for them. This is a matter of choice. Most authors
don’t use individual constants, but just individual variables. Since it is sup-
posed that this move doesn’t change the set of theorems, we regard the result-
ing theories as being the same, yet their languages differ. In this section, we
shall make some remarks that we regard as philosophically important,
which, although they are well known by the logician, may be not so well un-
derstood by the general philosopher interested in foundational issues. So let
us suppose for a moment that our language L2 has no individual constants.
To avoid any confusion, we shall term it L2 .
    Due to our new convention, the only non-logical symbol of L2 is 2. So
how can we refer to a particular relation R? (the same holds for any particular
object such as a structure named A, for instance). This is a common practice
in the mathematical discourse. Really, in geometry we usually say “Let A be a
point in a line r”, making use of individual letters for naming particular en-
tities, the point, and the line. How can we explain this move of naming
objects with constants that do not appear as primitive concepts of the em-
ployed languages? There are two answers to this challenge.
    The first is that we simply extend the language L2 with additional con-
stants to name the objects we intend to make reference to. Thus we can
extend L2 with symbols of three kinds: (1) additional individual constants,
(2) new predicate symbols, and (3) new operation symbols. In whatever
situation, we must make sure that the so-called Leśniewski’s criteria are
being respected [Sups.57, chap.8], namely, the Criterion of Eliminability
and the Criterion of Non-Creativity. The first says, in short, that the new
symbols can be eliminated. That is, the formula S introducing the new
symbol must be so that whenever a formula S1 with the new symbol
occurs, there is another formula S2 without this symbol such that S ! (S1
$ S2) is a theorem of the preceding theory (without the new symbol).
The second criterion says that there is no formula T in which the new
symbol does not occur such that S ! T is derivable from the preceding
theory, but T is not so derivable. In other words, no new theorem previ-
ously unproved and stated in terms of the primitive symbols and already
defined symbols can be derived. In our case, we can add the desired
symbols, say ‘R’ for the relation in the earlier definition of definability of
a relation (see definition 5.5.1), once we grant that the Leśniewski’s condi-
tions hold (which of course we suppose here).
                                    Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories   93
    The other alternative is to work with L2 proper and regard all other
symbols as metalinguistic abbreviations. This is ‘more economic’, and
we usually do it, for instance, when defining (in L2 ) the concept of
subset, posing that A  B ≔ 8x(x 2 A ! x 2 B). The new symbol 
does not make part of the language L2 but belongs to its metalanguage,
and the expression A  B simply abbreviates a sentence of L2 ; namely,
8x(x 2 A ! x 2 B). We can understand this move as enabling us to use
an auxiliary constant (say, ‘R’), provided that the object that it will
name exists (the proof of its existence is called theorem of legitimation
by Bourkaki [Bou.68, p.32].9 In the example, given two sets A and B,
we realize that all elements of A are also elements of B, hence we are jus-
tified to write A  B for expressing that (as a metalinguistic abbreviation).
In logic, we usually express that by the so called method of the auxiliary
constant, which may be formulated as follows. Let c be a constant that
does not appear in the formulas A or B. Assume that we have proven
that 9xA (the theorem of legitimation). If we have also proven that
   x                x
A½c  ‘ B, where A½c  stands for the formula obtained by the substitution
of c in any free occurrence of x, then ‘ B as well.
    But we need some care even here. Suppose we wish to refer to real
numbers. We cannot name all of them in the standard denumerable lan-
guage L2 . But in general, we can name a particular real number, say by
calling it zero. But there are real numbers that cannot be named even this
way, as we have seen before when we discussed the well-ordering of the
reals. This poses an interesting question regarding empirical sciences. In
constructing a mathematical model of a physical theory, we suppose we
represent physical entities, say quantum objects and the properties and re-
lations holding among them, in the mathematical framework we have
chosen, say ZFC set theory. How can we ensure that this really makes
sense? For instance, in some common interpretations of quantum mechan-
ics (the Copenhagen interpretation), we really cannot (with any sense) make
reference to quantum entities out of measurement. Out of measurement,
quantum entities are no more than sets of potentialities or possible out-
comes of measurement, to use Paul Davies’s words in his introduction to
Heisenberg’s book [Hei.89, p.8]. Let us give an example we shall discuss
next. Suppose we are considering the two electrons of a helium atom in
the fundamental state.
    The anti-symmetric wave function of the joint system can be written as

              1
    jc12 i ¼ pﬃﬃ ðjc1 ijc2 i  jc2 ijc1 iÞ;                               ð5:7Þ
               2

where |ψii (i ¼ 1, 2) are the wave functions of the individual electrons. Notice
that we need to label them by ‘1’ and ‘2’, for our languages are objectual—we
speak of objects.10 But we need to make this labeling not compelled with in-
dividuation, so we use (in this case) anti-symmetric functions, for the if |ψ21i
94 Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories
stands for the wave function of the system after a permutation of the elec-
trons, then ||ψ12i|2 ¼ ||ψ21i|2, that is, the relevant probabilities are the
same. For now, what is relevant is that this function cannot be factored,
giving a particular description of the electrons separately. Only after a mea-
surement, say of the component of their spin in a given direction, does the
wave function collapse either in |ψ1i|ψ2i or in |ψ2i|ψ1i and then indicate,
say, that electron 1 has spin up in the chosen direction, while electron 2
has spin down in the same direction (or the other way around). But,
before the measurement, nothing can be said of them in isolation. This
implies that when we say, for instance, that there are two electrons, one
here and another there, we are already supposing a measurement, thus
begging the question concerning their individuation.
   Situations such as this one are puzzling if we consider the underlying
mathematics as the classical one.11 Suppose we define the electron of a
helium atom that has spin up in a given direction. According to definition
5.5.2., we need to find a formula F(x) so that, if we denote that electron
by a, we can prove that the following formula
      8xðx ¼ a $ FðxÞÞ                                                    ð5:8Þ

is true in an adequate ‘quantum structure’. But what would be taken to be F
(x)?
    Really, according to standard set theory (ZF), when we say that there is
an electron here and another there, they are already distinct entities, and we
are presupposing a kind of realism concerning these entities. In other words,
in supposing two entities within ZF, we are really begging the question con-
cerning their individuation.12
    These remarks, we think, point to an interesting philosophical problem
of studying the definability of physical ‘objects’ and relations, but this
point will not be discussed here. Next, let us have a closer look at
Suppes’s and da Costa and Chuaqui’s approaches.


5.7    DA COSTA AND CHUAQUI—SUPPES PREDICATES

In this section, we will return to the general concept of structure having as
domain a family of sets. Given a structure and some language adequate for
this structure, we now discuss how to formulate a Suppes predicate for that
structure using that language, according to the directions suggested by N.
da Costa and R. Chuaqui [CosChu.88]. First of all, we recall the definition
of the similarity type of a structure E, which is a family of types that deter-
mines the kinds of relations present in the structure. According to this def-
inition, two structures have the same similarity type if their type of relations
form the same family and they have the same number of sets in their
domain.
                                   Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories          95
   Now, given structures E ¼ hD1 ; . . . ; Dn ; Ri i and G ¼ hE1 ; . . . ; En ; Li i of
the same similarity type, we consider how to extend a given function f :
Dk 7! Ek for k < n to a function mapping from ε({Dn}) to ε({En}).

Definition 5.7.1 Given the function f as described earlier, we define:

   (i) For the objects of type t, with 0  t < n, let f(Dk) ¼ {f(x) : x 2 Dk)}
  (ii) For t 2 T such that t ¼ ha0, . . . ,an1i, and R the set of objects of type
       t, we have f ðRÞ ¼ Pðf ðDa1 Þ  f ðDa1 Þ  . . .  f ðDan ÞÞ

   This function maps objects of the type a in ε(Dn) to objects of type a
in ε(En). The interesting case occurs when the following definition is verified.

Definition 5.7.2 Given structures E ¼ hD1 ; . . . Dn ; Ri i and G ¼ hE1 ; . . . ; En ;
Li i of the same similarity type s, and f a bijection from Dk to Ek with 0  k
< n, we say that the family f0 ¼ fs is an isomorphism between E and G when
ft(Rt) ¼ Lt, where Rt and Lt means that R and L have type t.

Definition 5.7.3 A sentence F of the language appropriate for the structure
E is called transportable if for any structure G isomorphic to E; that is,
    E     F()G        F:
    Intuitively speaking, a transportable relation does not depend upon spe-
cific properties of the involved sets, but refers only to the way they enter in
the relation, something that is given by the axioms. So a transportable rela-
tion cannot involve specific sets, but must speak of sets arbitrarily. So when
in a relation it appears something like the empty set ;, this is just a way of
speaking, for this symbol can be substituted by the sentence 9y8x(x 2     = y).
We shall return to this remark later.

Definition 5.7.4 A Suppes predicate is a formula PðEÞ of set theory that says
E is a structure of similarity type s satisfying Γ, a set of transportable sen-
tences F of the language adequate for E.

   When PðEÞ, that is, when E satisfies P, we say that E is a P-structure. Ac-
cording to da Costa and Chuaqui ([CosChu.88, p.104]), this definition cap-
tures the sense in which we can say that a theory is a class of models,
precisely, the class of models that are P-structures for some adequate P.
   We now consider some examples of Suppes’s predicates for some
theories.

5.7.1 A Suppes Predicate for Group Theory
Let G be a set; as defined earlier, we introduce the function tG, or simply t,
whose domain is the set T of types, to create the scale ε(G). We suppose
96 Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories
that the type of the elements of G is 0. Then we choose (1) a relation  of
type h0, 0, 0i — that is,  2 PðG  G  GÞ; (2) a relation  of the type h0,
0i — that is,  2 PðG  GÞ; and (3) an element e of type 0 — that is, e 2
G. As one can check from the definitions, the order of each of the relations
is 1 and the order of e is 0. Remembering that a n-ary function is a n þ 1-
ary relation, we have that the usual composition operation becomes a
ternary relation, and the opposite relation becomes a binary relation.
    The structure of groups is G ¼ hG; ; ; ei, and the order of this structure
is the greatest order of its relations, so ordðGÞ is 1; that is, G is a order-1
structure. The theory is not done yet, for we need to write down the postu-
lates in order to give the set-theoretical predicate.
    As defined earlier, the language for G is a second-order language (note that
the order of the language does not necessarily coincide with the order of the
structure). The set T of terms is formed by a set of variables of type t ¼ 0 or t
¼ 1 and the set {h0,0,0i, h0,0i, e0} of constant symbols. So the set X of free
generators is X ¼ fT t ðt0 ; . . . ; tn1 Þ : T t 2 Tt ^ t ¼ ha0 ; . . . ; an1 i 2 Tg (tk 2
Tk). Based on the aforementioned theorem, there is free algebra on the set
of free generators X, which is the language for the structure G.
    With the language so developed we can write the usual axioms for group
theory. Let’s call them A1, A2, and A3, respectively, as follows:

  A1 8x8y8z(((x  y)  z) ¼ (x  (y  z))),
  A2 8x9y(x  y ¼ e),
  A3 8x(x  e ¼ x).

   Then a Suppes predicate for group theory can be written as follows:
     GðXÞ()9G9  9  9eðX ¼ hG; ; ; ei ^ A1 ^ A2 ^ A3Þ:

   The structures that satisfy this predicate are the models of the theory,
namely, the groups. For more complex theories, of course we do not
present the axiomatics of a theory this way but, as in standard mathematics,
by describing the structure and listing the axioms. In the next example, we
shall proceed this way.



5.7.2 A Suppes Predicate for Classical Particle Mechanics
First, we need to present some mathematical ‘step’ structures: the first one
is the complete ordered field of real numbers R ¼ hR; þ; ; 0; 1; <i. There is
just one base set, the set R of real numbers. The objects of this set are of
type 0. The operations are þ, , 0, 1, <, which are of types h0, 0, 0i, h0, 0,
0i, 0, 0 and h0, 0i, respectively (one must not confuse the symbol 0 of
types with the element 0 of the field). As usual, these are the operations
                                Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories       97
of addition, multiplication, the identity element of addition, the identity
element of multiplication, and the relation of less than between real
numbers. The language of the field of real numbers according to our ap-
proach is a second-order language, and the axioms for the field are well
known, and we can easily see that they are transportable.
   The next structure is the vector space E ¼ hV; R; þ; ; Oi over the field of
real numbers R. In this case, there are two base sets, the set V of vectors and
the set R of real numbers. The objects of V are of type 1, while the real
numbers are of type 0. Besides the field’s operation, we have þ, , O,
which are, respectively, of types h1, 1, 1i, h0, 1, 1i, 1. A Euclidean vector
space is a vector space with the addition of an inner product and a vector
product; we denote by hx|yi and by [x, y] the inner product and the vecto-
rial product of vectors x and y, respectively. The first product gives a real
number and the second one another vector, which are objects of types h1,
1, 0i and h1, 1, 1i respectively. The order of the language of vector
spaces and that of the Euclidean vector space are 2 according to our
approach — that is, a second-order language. The axioms for these struc-
tures are well known and clearly transportable.
   Next, we present the real affine space, which is a vector real space with
an addition domain A, whose elements are of type 2 and are called points.
The new operation is the difference of points, which, for p, q 2 A, is a
vector denoted by qp, whose type is h2, 2, 1i; that is, the difference of
two points gives us a vector. The new axiom for this concept is the state-
ment that difference of points obeys the law of addition of points, which
says that for p, q, r 2 A, q  p þ r  q ¼ r  p. If the vector space is Eu-
clidean, the affine space is a Euclidean space. In Euclidean space, we can
define the distance between points p, q 2 A in the following way:
                       pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
dðp; qÞ :¼ kq  pk :¼ hq  pjp  qi.
   Now we present a Galilean space-time system. We add to the four-
dimensional affine space presented earlier in a new domain V 1 , which is a
subset of V and operation t from A into R of type h2, 0i and relations of
type h3, 3, 1i and h3, 3, 3i denoted by hji and [, ] respectively, and t rep-
resents the measure of time. The two axioms following must be satisfied:

  (a) V 1 is a three-dimensional vector subspace of V and hji and [, ] are
      its scalar product and vectorial product, respectively;
  (b) t is a function from A to R such that for each P 2 A the set {Q : t(Q) ¼
      t(P)} is a three-dimensional Euclidean space with vector space V1. The
      affine space for t(P) ¼ r is denoted by A(r).

   For a classical mechanical system, we need to add a new universe P, the
set of particles13 and the set N of natural numbers to index the external
forces. So the family of universes can be given by the sequence R, V, A,
98 Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories
V 1 , P, and N. The operations on these sets are those necessary to make R, V,
A, V1 a Galilean space-time system, plus the following new relations:

   (i) A function a of type h0, 2i, which gives the origin of a system of
       coordinates in each instant of time;
  (ii) A function s of type h4, 0, 2i for the position of a particle in each
       instant of time. We write sp(t) for this function;
 (iii) A mass function m of type h4, 0i;
 (iv) A force function f of type h4, 4, 0, 1i, which represents the internal
       forces;
  (v) A force function g of type h4, 0, 5, 1i, which represents the external
       forces.

   For the specific axioms of mechanics, we need notions of mathematical
analysis such as derivatives and convergence of series. The field of real
numbers must be completed with the corresponding operations of differen-
tiation, integration and addition of series. Since differentiation, for
example, takes functions of real numbers to functions of real numbers,
the order of this operation will be 2. So the language needed to talk
about this is structure is at least third-order language.
   The kinematical axioms are:

  (1) The range of t is an interval I of real numbers;
  (2) P is a finite and non-empty set;
  (3) a is a function from I to A such that for each i 2 I a(i) 2 A(i);
  (4) s is a function from P × I into A such that for each p 2 P and i 2 I we
      have that sp(i) 2 A(t);
  (5) m is a function from P into R;
  (6) f is a function from P × P × I into V1;
  (7) g is a function from P  I  N into V 1 ;
  (8) For every p 2 P and i 2 I, the vector function sp(i)  a(i) is twice
      differentiable at i.

  Dynamical Axioms:

  (1) For p 2 P m(p) is a positive real number;
  (2) For p, q 2 P and i 2 I f(p, q, i) ¼ (q, p, i);
  (3) For p, q 2 P and i 2 I [s(p, i)  s(q, i), f(p, q, i)  f(q, p, i)] ¼ O;
  (4) For p 2 P and i 2 I the series Sn(g(p, i, n) is absolutely convergent;
  (5) For p 2 P and i 2 I m(p)D2(sp(i)) ¼ Sq2Pf(p, q, i) þ Sn(g(p, i, n), where
      D2 is the second derivative with respect to i.

  These formulas are transportable in the sense defined previously.14
The motivations for these formulas can be found in the works of
Suppes cited in the bibliography. Other examples could (and perhaps
                               Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories      99
should) be pursued, but these are enough to emphasize that in da Costa
Chuaqui’s approach, we need to consider the language of the structure
and that we need also to axiomatize all the step structures necessary
for the main theory. It leads to a Herculean effort, of course, practically
similar to what was required by the approach suggested by the Received
View. Now we shall turn to Suppes’s own way of axiomatizing theories,
and we shall see that it has some advantages due to its simplicity and
power.


5.8   THE APPROACH OF SUPPES

The approach developed by Patrick Suppes in many of his works contrasts
with the previous work by da Costa and Chuaqui. The technique of prop-
erly axiomatizing a class of structures inside set theory is described, for in-
stance, in his [Sups.57]. He doesn’t use a formal language specific to
theory in study. In his work from the late 1960s [Sups.67], these kinds
of approaches are distinguished as intrinsic characterization of a theory
(when the axioms are formulated in a first-order language) and the extrin-
sic characterization of a theory (when the theory is axiomatized using the
resources of informal set theory). Intrinsically, a theory is characterized
when no appeal to any of its models is required, that is, by appealing
just to that which is intrinsic to each model and, consequently, captured
by a formal axiomatization. From an extrinsic point of view, a theory is
characterized by describing directly the class of intended models as struc-
tures build in set theory.
   Of course, in the context of the later mentioned work, Suppes distin-
guishes between presenting a class of structures through set-theoretical
predicates in contrast to characterizing it as a formal elementary theory.
He goes on and even calls our attention to the fact that it is not always
clear whether a class of structures characterized extrinsically has an ele-
mentary axiomatization.15 To provide an illustration, consider the class
of well-orderings, that is, of structures W ¼ hD; Ri where R is a well-or-
dering on D. As is well known, there is no elementary axiomatization
of this class.16 However, we can give an extrinsic characterization of
this class of structures (and, by leaving the restriction to elementary lan-
guages behind, the da Costa–Chuaqui approach presented earlier can
also do it).
   The distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic characterization and the
benefits of exploring a scientific theory by looking at its models and not
only at its syntactical characterization is a feature of Suppes’s approach
to the so-called semantic approach. In particular, his emphasis on models
is closely related to his own approach to the relation between theory and
experiment, which does not seem to be correctly described only in syntac-
tical terms (as we have already discussed in our chapter 1). Anyway,
100 Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories
Suppes still needs a way to extrinsically characterize a class of models, and
he does that by axiomatizing the theories inside set theory.
   Suppes says he assumes intuitive set-theory, but we can continue to
suppose that our discussion is conduced inside ZFC at an informal
level, that is, without justifying every step of the required constructions.
The first immediate advantage of starting with ZFC (or with some suita-
ble set theory) is that one can employ all of the mathematics needed
without explicitly having to axiomatize or listing its suppositions, for
‘everything’ we need is by hypothesis already done inside ZFC. Also,
one leaves metamathematical considerations of usual axiomatizations,
which proceed through the elaboration of formal systems and works in
the known mathematical environment, simply by making use of the
mathematics available. This last point was one of the attractions of the
semantic approach over the Received View (see a full discussion in
[Sup.77], but look also at [Lut.12] for a more realistic reading of the
demands of the Received View), which proceeded through formal
systems.
   In general terms, a class of structures is axiomatized in set theory by
providing for a list of axioms that a theory should satisfy. Those axioms
are stated directly inside set theory using the vocabulary of set theory
and further symbols that may be introduced by definition and that are
specific to the theory. Let us see how we can define a set-theoretical pred-
icate for groups. It is important to remark that now we do not need to
describe all the step theories to be used, since we may assume that all
of them can be given in the set theory being presupposed. Suppes gives
various alternative formulations of this theory (mainly due to his con-
cerns with the theory of definition and the search for an adequate and
perspicuous form that conforms to some rigorous standards of defini-
tions). To concentrate ourselves in one of the proposed ways of charac-
terizing the theory, we can define a group through the following set-
theoretical predicate, given informally first: a group is an algebra G ¼
hG; i where G 6¼ ; and  is a binary operation on G, and . . ., the dots
being completed by the usual group axioms, written in the language of
ZFC:

 A1 (8x, y, z 2 G)(x  y)  z ¼ x  (y  z)
 A2 There is an e 2 G such that for all x 2 G, x  e ¼ e  x ¼ x
 A3 (8x 2 G)(9x0 2 G)(x  x0 ¼ x0  x ¼ e)

   Now this is an example of a set-theoretical predicate for group theory
and, as Suppes claims, it is entirely in conformity with the usual mathemat-
ical practice.
   To be more precise, and using some terminology introduced before, we
could specify the nature of the elements of the structure as well. So a group
G is an ordered pair hG, i with  2 t(hi, i, ii) satisfying A1, A2, and A3
                              Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories      101
stated before. In symbols, the predicate G is (or may be) the following one:

    PðGÞ $ 9G9  ðG ¼ hG; i ^ G 6¼ ; ^ 
                                                                          ð5:9Þ
           2 PðG  G  GÞ ^ A1 ^ A2 ^ A3Þ:

    Suppes calls a group any structure G ¼ hG; i that satisfies this predicate.
Nothing specific is said about the satisfaction relation, or about the lan-
guage in which the axioms are formulated. But, as we mentioned before,
it is the enlarged language of the set theory (with new symbols such as
G, , etc.) that is being employed, and this is in conformity with the stan-
dard use in mathematics. How does one show that some structure is in
the class characterized by the predicate so defined? For example, how
does one show that hZ; þi is a group? One simply derives, as theorems of
ZFC, that the elements of Z, along with the operation þ, have the proper-
ties required for something to be a group. Then, hZ; þi is said to satisfy the
axioms for group theory and, so the structure is a model of group theory, or
it is a group. We shall discuss precisely the relation of the axioms with the
set-theoretical structures later.
    Despite its great simplicity, the Suppes approach is very powerful indeed,
and here we point to another of its advantages. While the standard first-
order group axioms (to keep with our example) are enough to characterize
all groups as being models of the axiomatics, in using set-theoretical pred-
icates, we can axiomatize certain classes of models only. A typical example
would be to axiomatize all groups except a certain specific case; for simpli-
city, let us suppose that we wish to leave out the additive group of the in-
tegers hZ; þi. We can do it by adding to the set-theoretical predicate given
above a fourth condition A4 (another axiom), namely, a clause restricting
the items that satisfy the predicate, say by requiring that those structures
that satisfy it are groups but different from hZ; þi (this can be easily ex-
pressed, for instance, by requiring in the set-theoretical predicate that
G 6¼ Z). This is most relevant for the semantic approach, which sometimes
is said to be able to deal only with classes of intended models of theories
[Sup.00, p.104].
    It is worth noticing that an important difference between Suppes’s
and da Costa–Chuaqui’s approaches is that in the former, the predicate
does not need to be transportable, something considered crucial in the
later, for the authors follow Bourbaki. The explicit reference to a spe-
cific set (in our sample case, Z) shows that the predicate for the class of
structures of groups except the additive group of the integers is not
transportable.
    For another example, one can take the Peano structures P ¼ ho; 0; si,
with the usual Peano axioms in ZFC. Now the structure 2P ¼
h2o; 0; 2si, where 2ω is the set of even natural numbers and 2σ is the addi-
tion of 2, is also a model of these axioms. One can construct a Suppes pred-
icate with the Peano postulates plus the requirement that the domain is
102 Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories
different from 2ω, for example, and then this structure is not in the class of
models of the set-theoretical postulate for arithmetics. This is possible
because, in the language of ZFC, we can make reference to a particular
element we leave outside the class of structures determined by the predicate.
This fact is precisely what distinguishes the Suppes approach from da
Costa–Chuaqui, and even from Bourbaki, let us insist once more. In the
last two cases, the predicate (or the axioms in the case of Bourbaki) has
two main parts: a typification and the axioms themselves. The typification
is a formula, or a conjunction of formulas that specify the particular rela-
tions/operations/distinguished elements we are considering (for the formal
definition, see [Bou.68, p.261]). Let us exemplify: in the case of groups,
the typification is  2 PðG  G  GÞ. In the case of vector spaces, we
have þ 2 PðV  V  VÞ ^  2 PðK  V  VÞ. The axioms, in both cases
must be transportable formulas; roughly speaking, this means that the def-
inition of the formula does not depend upon any specific property of the
construction made from the basic and auxiliary sets, but only refers to
the way in which they enter in the relation through the axioms [Bou.68,
loc.cit.]. In the Suppes approach, this restriction is not imposed; that is,
the formulas needn’t be transportable, and so we gain a wide range of
extra possibilities.
    For another example of these possibilities, let us consider a simple pred-
icate for a structure composed by a set D and an operation σ picked from
t(hi, ii) (that is, a binary operation on D) satisfying the conditions
(axioms) (a) ; 2 D, (b) σ is injective, (c) ; does not belong to the image
of σ, and (d) D is the least set satisfying these conditions. In this case, we
are mentioning a particular item, ;, and saying in the axioms that this
chosen element must belong to the domain of the structure. Since we are
making reference to a well-defined object (the set ;), the formula that de-
scribes the set-theoretical predicate for the theory is not transportable. In
this particular example, we still have that it is not possible to axiomatize
M ¼ hD; si in the standard way, say by fixing a specific vocabulary and
making use of first-order logic (more on this later).
    The fact that we can make such moves shows that set-theoretical predi-
cates differ from Suppes’s predicates as defined by da Costa and Chuaqui
from Bourbaki’s species of structures, although some predicates can fit
the claims of transportability. The reason is that an axiomatics (say, in
Bourbaki’s style) should not make reference to specific objects such as the
empty set. In fact, Bourbaki requires that the theory’s postulates must be
transportable formulas with respect to some typification, which teaches
us how to deal with the added symbols of the structure. In other words,
transportable formulas must be invariant by isomorphisms, and so they
cannot make reference to specific objects [Bou.68, p.261–2]. These difficul-
ties can be surpassed with some modifications and adaptations of our
example, but they shall not concern us here. Anyway, in the Suppes-style
axiomatization, we have free access to all mathematics that can be found
                                Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories        103
in ZFC without constraints on the kinds of formulas that can be used to ax-
iomatize a theory.
   The previous discussion can be summarized in an interesting result.
Recall that, when we restrict ourselves to first-order languages, in order
to axiomatize a class of structures of order-1, we must give a set Γ of sen-
tences such that all the structures in the class are models (in the sense of
Tarski) of Γ and all models of Γ are in the class. A necessary and sufficient
condition for a class of structures to be axiomatized by a set of sentences is
that it must be closed by elementary equivalence and by formation of ultra-
products (for the definitions of those notions, see [Men.97]).17
   Then for example, in this kind of axiomatization, when we deal with
groups and the usual postulates for this theory written in a first-order lan-
guage, we cannot have hZ; þi out of the class of structures if h2Z; 2þi is in
this class (here 2Z denotes the set of even integers and 2þ addition of 2),
for both are elementarily equivalent. The same holds for models of first-
order Peano arithmetics, for the standard model P ¼ ho; 0; si and
2P ¼ h2o; 0; s0 i, where 2ω is the set of even numbers and s0 is the operation
of adding 2. That is, we cannot have an axiomatization in a first-order lan-
guage of one of them without having the other one as well, for they are ele-
mentarily equivalent. But, as we have seen, using the Suppes-style
axiomatization, we can define classes of models that are order-1 structures
but that are not closed by elementary equivalence. That is, Suppes’s axiomat-
ization is stronger than the usual one since it axiomatizes more classes of
structures than it is possible to do with the usual procedure. To check this,
we need only to consider the examples given earlier. So the examples show
that there are classes of structures of order-1 axiomatizable by a Suppes pred-
icate but not by a set of first-order set of sentences.
   This result can be generalized to higher-order languages by following the
same procedure (just take the class of all well-orderings except a particular
well-ordering, for instance hω, 2i).
   For another example, compare now Suppes’s axiomatization of particle
mechanics with the one provided before by the da Costa and Chuaqui
approach.
   A system of particle mechanics is a 5-tuple18
    P ¼ hP; T; m; s; f ; gi;

where P is a non-empty set (the ‘particles’), T is an interval in the set of real
numbers (say expressing an interval of time), m is a function from P to Rþ so
that if p 2 P, then m(p) is the mass of p, s is a function from P × T in R3 , so
that s(p, t) is a vector expressing the position of the particle p at time t, f is a
function with domain P × T × I, where I is a set of positive integers, so that f
(p, t, i) is a vector representing the forces acting on p at t, and g is a vector
representing the external forces acting on a particle at a given time t. All these
concepts are subjected to the kinematical and dynamical axioms that follow:
104 Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories
Definition 5.8.1 A Newtonian particle mechanics is a structure
    P ¼ hP; T; m; s; f; gi

satisfying the following axioms:
    Kinematical axioms

  P1 P is a finite non-empty set;
  P2 T is an interval of real numbers;
  P3 for p 2 P, sp is twice differentiable in T.

   Dynamical axioms
  P4 for p 2 P, m(p) is a positive real number;
  P5 for p, q 2 P, t 2 T, f(p, q, t) ¼ f(q, p, t);
  P6 for p, q 2 P, t 2 T, s(p, t) × f(p, q, t) ¼ s(q, t) × f(q, p, t);
  P7 for p 2 P and t 2 T, m(p)D2sp(t) ¼ ∑q2P f(p, q, t) þ g(p, t).

   As we see, it is easier to use this kind of procedure. A possible problem
with this approach is that Suppes does not make reference to the specific set
theory to be used in the axiomatization of a theory. We are free to use the
theory we need to get the concepts we need. But there is also another kind
of situation we shall describe now, which deals not specifically with the ax-
iomatization of the theory, but with its interpretation, or semantics. Let us
look at quantum mechanics to understand this problem.


5.8.1 An Axiomatization of Non-relativistic Quantum
      Mechanics
Let us consider a way to axiomatize non-relativistic quantum mechanics by
means of a set-theoretical predicate following Suppes’s approach. We shall
be working informally, hoping that the reader understands that with a great
boring effort, all could be done in terms of a ‘legitimate’ set-theoretical
predicate in a set theory such as ZFC. We shall just present the relevant
structures and the corresponding postulates, according to the standard
mathematical practice. So we proceed as Suppes in his examples. Further-
more, we are not claiming that our axiomatics is adequate for all cases,
since we restrict ourselves mainly to the finite dimensional case and to
pure states only (mixtures are mentioned only in brief). So we shall be
working in informal set theory, but if necessary, we may suppose a
system such as ZFC. The Axiom of Choice seems to be essential here,
mainly in the infinite dimensional case, for we need to grant that the
vector spaces we use (Hilbert spaces) do have basis, and the general
proof that a vector space has a basis depends on this axiom. The novelty
in our approach is that we introduce a collection of physical objects (or
systems) in the formalism, something that is absent in the standard
                                Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories    105
approaches (really, in these approaches, the reference to physical objects is
made only indirectly when we say—informally—that the vector state repre-
sents a quantum physical system; but this system never appears in the for-
malism). The definition is the one that follows, where, according to
Suppes’s approach, we presuppose some step theories given in set theory,
such as the theory of Hilbert spaces, probability, differential equations,
and all the involved mathematical apparatuses.

Definition 5.8.2 A non-relativistic quantum mechanics structure is a tuple
of the form

                    ^ g; fU
    Q ¼ hS; fHi g; fA     ^ g; BðRÞi; with i 2 I; j 2 J; k 2 K;
                      ij    ik


where

   (i) S is a collection19 whose elements are called physical objects, or
       physical systems.
  (ii) {Hi} is a collection of mathematical structures, namely, complex
       separable Hilbert spaces whose cardinality is defined in the particular
       application of the theory.
 (iii) fA^ ij g is a collection of self-adjunct (or Hermitian) operators over a
       particular Hilbert space Hi.
 (iv) {Uik} is a collection of unitary operators over a particular Hilbert
       space Hi.
  (v) BðRÞ is the collection of Borel sets over the set of real numbers.

  The Hilbert space formalism, whose postulates we shall see in a moment,
does not speak of space and time, something essential when we intend to
apply it to the ‘real world’. Next we comment on this important point.

Definition 5.8.3 To each quantum system s 2 S we associate a 4-tuple of the
form

    s ¼ hE4 ; cðx; tÞ; D; Pi:

   Here E4 is the Galilean spacetime;20 each point is denoted by a 4-tuple hx,
y, z, ti where x ¼ hx, y, zi denotes the coordinates of the system and t is a
parameter representing time, ψ(x, t) is a function over E4 called the wave
function of the system, D 2 BðRÞ is a Borelian, and P is a function defined,
for some i (determined by the physical system s), in Hi  fA   ^ g  BðRÞ and
                                                                 ij
                                                   ^
assuming values in [0, 1] so that the value Pðc; A; DÞ 2 ½0; 1 is the probabil-
ity that the measurement of the observable A (represented by the self-adjunct
operator A)^ for the system in the state ψ(x, t) lies in the Borelian set Δ. We
can see the relationship between the state vector and the wave function as
follows. Let (x, t) denote the location operation at time t. Then we put ψ
106 Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories
(x, t) ¼ h(x, t)|ψi; that is, the wave function is described by the coefficients of
the expansion of the state vector in the orthonormal basis of the position op-
erator (a more precise description will be given soon).
   These concepts are subjected to the following postulates:

Postulate 1 To each physical system s 2 S we associate a Hilbert space
  H 2 fHi g. Composite quantum systems are associated with complex
  Hilbert spaces that are the tensor product of the Hilbert spaces for
  each system, as usual.
Postulate 2 The one-dimensional subspaces of H denote the states the
  system may be in. These spaces are called rays by the physicists. To sim-
  plify the notation, usually they are represented by unitary vectors ψ (or by
  |ψi in Dirac’s notation) that generate these spaces. Hence cψ, for c 2 C,
  represents the same state as ψ, as does ψ.c (this is a typical physicist’s
  abuse of notation).21 These vectors are said to represent pure states of
  the system. It is also postulated that linear combinations of pure states,
  that is, vectors of the form ψ ¼ ∑n anψn, for an 2 C (the linear combina-
  tion may comprise any finite number of vectors) called superpositions by
  the physicist, also denote pure states. This assumption is called the Super-
  position Postulate.
Postulate 3 To each observable (physical quantity that can be measured) A,
  we associate a self-adjoint operator A  ^ 2 fA^ ij g.
Postulate 4 The possible values of the measurement of observable A for the
  system s in state ψ lie in the spectrum (the set of eigenvalues) of the asso-
  ciated operator A.^ This was called the Quantization Algorithm by M.
  Redhead [Red.87, p.5].
Postulate 5 Here we have the Born Rule. Given a system s, which is asso-
  ciated with a 4-tuple σ according to the aforementioned definition, let
  A be an observable to be measured on the system in state ψ. First we
  take the Hilbert space of the states of the system, H. Now, let {αn} be
  an orthonormal basis for H formed by eigenvectors of A        ^ (something
  that is possible to assume, since A  ^ is diagonalizable) so that there are
  complex numbers cn such that ψ ¼ ∑n cnαn, with ∑ nn|cn|2 ¼ 1. We
  know that the cn are the Fourier coefficients cn ¼ hαn|ψi, where hji is
  the inner product. Let us denote the eigenvalues associated with the
                              ^ n ¼ an an . Then we have the Statistical Algo-
  vectors αn by an; that is, Aa
  rithm [Red.87, p.8]: the probability that the measurement of observable
  A gives the value an when the system in the state ψ is
                         2            2
       ProbcA ðan Þ ¼ jcn j ¼ jhan jcij

  for the non-degenerate state (that is, all eigenvalues of A^ are distinct;
  when the operator is degenerate, the probability is obtained by
  summing the |cj|2 for all α’s associated with the same eigenvalue).22
                              Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories      107
     Other possible states that are not pure are called mixtures. They can be
  briefly described as follows by means of statistical operators (or statistical
  matrices) [Red.87, pp.15–16]. We assign probabilities wk to a set of pure
  states {βk} in which the system may be found so that we have a statistical
  ensemble of several quantum (possible) states. Let Pβp denote the projec-
  tion operator whose range is the unitary sub-space generated by βp. Then
  the statistical operator for the system becomes
           X
       r¼       wk Pbk ;
            k


  and the expectation value of an observable A is given in terms of its Her-
  mitean associated operator by
                    ^
      hAi :¼ Trðr  AÞ;

  where Tr is the trace function.
Postulate 6 Let us call this one the Dynamic Postulate. It says that if the
  system is in the instant t0 in state ψ(t0)—here the notation is adapted in
  order to consider the state as depending on time—then in a distinct
  time t the system evolves to the state ψ(t) according to the Schrödinger
  equation [Pen.05, p.536], [Red.87, p.12]
             ^
      cðtÞ ¼ UðtÞcðt 0 Þ;


  where U ^ is a unitary operator.
Postulate 7 This is the Collapse Postulate. It says that immediately after the
  measurement of observable A for the system in state ψ ¼ ∑n cnαn gives the
  value |cn|2 ¼ |hαn|ψi|2, the system enters in the state described by the cor-
  responding eigenvector αn.

   We shall now offer some hints about how to connect the aforementioned
structure with possible applications.
   Let us suppose that the state of a physical system is given by the vector ψ
in a suitable Hilbert space. In order to represent observables such as posi-
tion and momentum, we need infinitely many dimensional Hilbert spaces.
So suppose a particle is moving in a line and let X be the position observable
whose Hermitian corresponding operator is X.     ^ If {ψx} is an orthonormal
basis for the Hilbert space formed by eigenvectors of X,  ^ with λi being the
                                   ^
corresponding eigenvalues, then Xci ¼ li ci . Thus the state vector can be
expanded in this bases, that is, we may write
         Z
    c ¼ hcx jcicx dx;
108 Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories
and the Fourier coefficients in this expansion enable us to define, or form
the wave functions

    cðxÞ :¼ hcx jci;

which are the functions ψ(x, t) ¼ h(x, t)|ψi described earlier with another
notation. If we assume that ψ is normalized, that is kψk ¼ 1, then we have
    Z
            
       cðxÞ cðxÞdx ¼ 1;


where the star stands for complex conjugation. So ψ(x) must be square in-
tegrable, that is, an element of the Hilbert space L2 of the square integrable
complex functions.23 But, in general, we need also not-square integrable
functions, so we need to work in an expanded, or rigged Hilbert space,
but we shall not enter this discussion here [Mad.05].
   Of course, all non-relativistic quantum mechanics can be developed from
this axiomatic basis.
   One of the interesting questions that can be put here is the following one.
Since quantum objects may be indiscernible, sharing all their characteristics
(for instance, bosons in the same quantum state), should S be taken to be a
set? We remember that in standard (extensional) mathematics a set is a col-
lection of distinct objects.24 We will not address this question in full here,
but just to call the attention of the reader to the importance of considering
the mathematical apparatus where the structures are developed. So let us
give two examples.
   The first one concerns semantics. The mathematician Yuri Manin said
that quantum mechanics (better, its language) has no semantics. And
more, he suggested that quantum mechanics has not even a language, a
proper language, making use of a fragment of the language of standard
functional analysis (the theory of Hilbert spaces in most presentations)
[Man.10]. But, given the axiomatics presented earlier, we may say that
there is a reasonable language involved, and we as philosophers or as logi-
cians would like to know whether it is possible to ascribe to it a reasonable
semantics in the standard sense. In order to do it, first we need a domain of
discourse, let us call it D. But suppose, as it is common in many quantum
cases, that the quantum objects being considered are indiscernible (or iden-
tical in the physicist’s jargon, which is an abuse of language), say a collec-
tion of identical bosons in the same quantum state. In this situation, they
have all properties in common, even spatio-temporal ones, if these
notions make sense at all. In this case, we would not be able to discern
the systems by any means. But if we are using ZFC as our metatheory, D
is a set, hence its elements are always distinguishable, even if only in prin-
ciple; if D is finite, they can be effectively discerned. This is, of course, con-
trary to the idea of the indiscernibility of the quanta. So we would be in
                                 Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories             109
need of a different metamathematical framework to elaborate our seman-
tics. Such a theory, as we have seen already, exists and is called quasi-set
theory, where we may have collections of objects that may be completely
indiscernible! For details, see [AreKra.14], [DomHolKra.08], [FreKra.06],
and [KraAre.15].
   The second example concerns names of quantum entities. For the same
reasons posed earlier, in certain situations, we should have no way to
name certain quantum systems, even if they are fermions, which obey
Pauli’s Exclusion Principle. In fact, suppose that we name Peter and
Paul the two electrons of a helium atom in its fundamental state (less
energy). Supposing that we can speak of the electrons in this situation, 25
they are in a superposition and cannot be discerned. But let us suppose we
wish to measure the spin of the electrons in a given direction, say in the z-
direction. Thus we know from quantum mechanics that one of them will
have spin UP in the chosen direction while the other one will have spin
DOWN in the same direction. So they do not have all the same properties
in common, saving Pauli’s principle.26 But which one has spin UP? Peter,
Paul? There is no way to know the answer! If we admit that something is
lacking, we need to assume that there are hidden variables of some kind
and not all physicists are sympathetic to this idea. Thus, apparently, this
is not a simple epistemological question in which we are not able to iden-
tify each of the two electrons: it is beyond doubt that the names have no
meaning in this world. They are just mock names, which have no signifi-
cance as proper names have in standard semantics.27
   As we see, there are good reasons for looking for an alternative
metamathematical framework, at least in the case of quantum mechanics.
For further details on this point, see the aforementioned suggested
references.




NOTES

   1. The binary group operation  is a certain function from G × G in G or, what
      is the same, it is a certain ternary relation on G, that is, a collection of triples
      ha, b, ci of elements of G, with c ¼ a  b.
   2. In fact, to allow individuals as we are doing or to identify them with their
      unit sets are both commitments to individuals anyway. If one is wishing to
      avoid individuals for structuralist reasons, then maybe ZFC is not the best
      framework to work with, since individuals are always given in the domain
      of the structure. Interesting as it is, we shall not concern ourselves with struc-
      turalism in this book.
   3. Most texts on Universal Algebra speak of absolutely free algebras. We shall
      omit the term ‘absolutely’ from now on.
   4. As we have seen in the previous chapter, there are cardinals whose existence
      cannot be proved in ZFC, provided this theory is consistent. Inaccessible car-
      dinals belong to this class.
110 Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories
   5. Of course we could use the schema of free algebras to characterize this lan-
      guage, but this would demand a lot of artificiality and will not conduce to
      anything relevant. The important thing is to acknowledge that the languages
      we will consider can be treated as free algebras.
   6. We are following here also some suggestions made by Newton da Costa
      through personal communications in seminars.
   7. Of course this definition can be conformed to definition 5.5.1.
   8. The interested reader can check theorem 4.11 of S. Feferman’s paper and the
      remark on p.342, just after the proof of the theorem; see http://matwbn.icm.
      edu.pl/ksiazki/fm/fm56/fm56129.pdf.
   9. This is essentially what Mendelson calls ‘Rule C’; see [Men.97, p.81].
  10. Toraldo di Francia says that objectuation is a primitive act of our mind; see
      [Tor.81, p.222].
  11. We shall return to this point at the end of this chapter.
  12. This is, in our view, the main difficulty involved in attempts made by Muller
      and Saunders [MulSau.08] and by Muller and Seevinck [MulSee.09] to
      discern quantum entities; by assuming ZF as their mathematical framework,
      they are already assuming that the represented entities are either identical
      (that is, they are the very same entity) or that they are distinguishable, and
      this is not a characteristic of quantum objects proper, but of the mathematics
      they have employed.
  13. It is important to realize for what follows that in this case P can be taken as a
      set of a set theory such as ZFC. The quantum mechanical case will be men-
      tioned later, and in this situation, sometimes the domain of entities will not
      be not a set, as we shall see.
  14. In fact, even in the case of the set R of real numbers, the general situation can
      be described taking any completed ordered field, so the axiomatics does not
      speak of any particular set.
  15. Note that in the da Costa–Chuaqui approach we just presented, no restric-
      tion to elementary languages is required.
  16. Perhaps it would be interesting to review some concepts from logic here. Let
      L be a first-order language and T a theory in L. A model M of T is an L-
      structure that satisfies the postulates of T. Let us call M(T) the class (in
      general not a set) of all L-structures that are models of T. Let K be a class
      of structures. We say that K is elementary, or finitely axiomatizable, if
      there is a finite (a finite number of axioms) T such that K ¼ M(T).
  17. We thank Antonio M. N. Coelho and Newton C. A da Costa for calling our
      attention to these points and for discussions on these themes.
  18. Here we take a simplified version of this structure; see Suppes [Sups.57],
      chap. 12. In [Sups.02], Suppes provides an alternative formulation.
  19. Next we shall question whether this collection can be considered a set of
      ZFC.
  20. For details, which do not interest us here, see [Pen.05, chap.17].
  21. The reason for this to be an abuse of notation is easy to explain. The oper-
      ation of multiplication of a vector by a scalar (a complex number) is defined
      to be multiplication to the left; that is, it is a function from C  H to H. If we
      want that this also represents a function from H  C to H, we need to say it
      explictly.
  22. For details, see [Red.87, p.8].
  23. Roughly,
      R1            this is the space of the complex functions f such that
                  2
       1
           jf ðxÞj dx < 1.
  24. Cantor’s ‘definition’ of the concept of set is well known: sets are collections
      of distinct objects of our intuition or of our thoughts [Can.55, p.85].
                             Axiomatization, and Scientific Theories         111
25. Thus we need to adopt an interpretation that is not ‘instrumentalist’, such as
    Bohr’s, to whom quantum mechanics just provides us probabilities of
    measurements.
26. Electrons are fermions and cannot have all the same quantum properties in
    common. This is what Pauli’s principle says, roughly.
27. This ‘mock individuality’ was an idea advanced by Toraldo di Francia; see
    [FreKra.06, p.361] also for references.
6       Models and Scientific Theories




In this chapter, we shall return to issues of a foundational-philosophical
nature, where we address important questions about the nature of scientific
theories in light of the developments made in the previous chapters. Ques-
tions concerning the nature of scientific theories are a constant presence in
the philosophy of science, and as we saw in chapter 1, the debate on the
precise nature of the semantic approach has recently reappeared. Our
main aim is to explore the consequences that the specific framing of theories
as exposed in the previous chapter may have when we deal with models,
languages, and the general structure of scientific theories. The
investigation will proceed at the metalevel.
   As we have seen in the previous chapters, models are central to the
semantic approach to scientific theories in both Suppes’s and in da Costa
and Chuaqui’s views. But the word ‘model’ has distinct meanings in these
two approaches. Here we recall that, just as we have done in previous chap-
ters, we are following Patrick Suppes, according to whom most of the dis-
tinct senses of the word ‘model’ may be profitably studied as set-theoretical
structures (on the plurality of meanings of the word ‘model’, among them
iconic models, analogy models, logical models, and others, see the discus-
sion in [Sups.02, §2.1]). As we have remarked in chapter 1, the current
debate centers around the issue of whether a set theoretical structure
must necessarily comprise an interpretation of a language or whether it
can be merely a kind of ‘language-free’ structure. As we have seen,
mostly as a result of the investigations by Lutz [Lut.15], the distinction
between both approaches seems to be practically none. In this chapter,
among other things, we shall see how da Costa and Chuaqui’s and Suppes’s
approaches feature in these debates.


6.1   AGAIN ON THE ORDER OF LANGUAGES
      AND STRUCTURES

As a first important remark (which was already highlighted in chapter 1), it
is usually claimed that the semantic or the model-theoretical approach to
                                          Models and Scientific Theories        113
scientific theories was inspired somehow in Tarski’s work of the 1950s,
when he started the development of (standard) Model Theory, a branch
of mathematical logic that deals mainly with the relations between first-
order formal languages and set-theoretical structures that interpret them.
So, by taking a glimpse in the relevant literature, we find that most philos-
ophers think that the models of scientific theories are models of first-order
languages in the Tarskian sense, which, as we shall see soon, is a simplifica-
tion of the issue, given that in general the languages of most scientific the-
ories are not first-order languages and the structures are not (as we shall call
them) order-1 structures. So let us begin by liberating the whole discussion
from the limitation to first-order languages and structures that are adequate
exclusively to such languages.
    In the previous chapter, we have defined rigorously the order of a formal
language. As it is common in most cases, these languages are finitary lan-
guages, comprising only formulas of finite length and, in particular, encom-
passing finite families of conjunctions and disjunctions, as well as finite
strings of quantifiers. So we can characterize them with the general notation
Lnoo , where n indicates the order of the language, n 2 {1, 2, 3, . . .}. If n is not
a natural number, we say that the order of the language is ω. When n ¼ 1,
we speak of first-order languages, of second-order languages when n ¼ 2,
and so on. The structures where these languages are interpreted are
order-1 structures, and this means that we quantify only over individuals
of the domain(s) of the structure, but neither over sets of such individuals
(i.e. their properties) nor over elements of higher-order, such as sets of
sets of individuals, and so on. Second-order languages admit predicate var-
iables, which are interpreted (extensionally) as sets of individuals, binary
relations of individuals, and, in general, k-ary relations of individuals.1
Third-order languages are still more general, and so on, until the language
of order ω, which is essentially the language of type theory.
    The definition of the order of a structure was given previously, and we
shall not repeat it here; intuitively, the greater the order of the structure,
the greater the order of the elements that are relata of the involved relations
(sets of sets, sets of sets of sets, and so on). Most scientific theories employ
sophisticated mathematical theories, so they cannot be characterized as struc-
tures of order-1. A simple example is that of a topological space, which can
be written as T ¼ hX; ti, with X being a non-empty set and τ a topology over
X, that is, a certain set of subsets of X obeying well-known postulates.2 But,
as we have seen already, more sophisticated structures, such as those for clas-
sical particle mechanics and non-relativistic quantum mechanics, to keep with
our examples, require much more than simple relations whose relata are el-
ements of the domains. So, in order to deal with interesting scientific theories,
we need to employ higher-order structures.
    In view of that need of higher-order structures, how is the semantic
approach to theories to be framed? As we have seen, our understanding
of the semantic approach is that, following the general lines of French
114 Models and Scientific Theories
[Fre.15], it simply furnishes the tools for representing theories. The issue of
whether there is the need to have an underlying language and how it affects
the representational power of the approach is something we shall also touch
on. The main point is that language is a problem when we identify a theory
with some of its formulations. As we shall see, the approach by da Costa
and Chuaqui as well as the approach by Suppes may deal with those
issues. Thus we shall add some more philosophical remarks on both ap-
proaches and the relation between the postulates of their Suppes predicates
with their respective models.
   We begin with the approach by Suppes to theories.



6.2   FURTHER REMARKS ON THE SUPPES APPROACH

Let us recall that Suppes’s approach to scientific theories involves specifying
a wide class of structures that he calls the ‘models’ of a certain set-
theoretical predicate. The predicate itself is understood as axiomatizing
the theory so that its postulates are formulated in the language of set
theory itself, perhaps extended with the symbols proper of the considered
theory. Our examples in the previous chapter were classical particle me-
chanics, group theory, vector spaces theory, and non-relativistic quantum
mechanics. For continuing the discussion and also for presenting a new
example, let us consider the real vector space Rn ¼ hRn ; R; þ; i, where
Rn is the set of n-tuples of real numbers, and the operations are the addition
of n-tuples (by summing the corresponding coordinates) and the product of
n-tuples by real numbers. This structure is said to be a model of the theory
of vector spaces. But what does this affirmation mean in precise terms? Are
we really speaking about models in the same sense as Tarski?
   The answer to that question will bring to light what is really distinctive
about the approach by Suppes to the semantic approach. The main point is
that, by lying the postulates of the theory directly in the language of set
theory, and not in a specific formal language that is interpreted by the rel-
evant structures, Suppes leaves behind precisely the semantic component,
which is adopted when we have an interpretation of a language [Mul.11,
sec.6], [KraAreMor.11], [Lut.15]. In the specific case of Suppes, there is
simply no set Γ of postulates in a formal language so that the structures
A of a given class are such that they not only interpret the non-logical
vocabulary of the language but also are such that
      A   G:

In fact, following Suppes’s approach, that semantic component would be
impossible, given that the postulates of Γ involve set-theoretical vocabulary
and other elements. Recall that the postulates are formulated directly in the
language of set theory. Any interpretation of that language would require
                                               Models and Scientific Theories        115
an interpretation of the language of set theory itself (as we discussed in
chapter 3, this can be done only if a stronger set theory is assumed as the
metalanguage).
   But then what is the relevant notion of model that is at stake? Certainly we
have set-theoretical structures of any order, and the Suppes predicate serves
to gather the relevant structures into classes that represent the theory. Given
those classes, we can then study the relations between distinct theories,
search for representation theorems, study the relation of the theory with
data, and so on. But how do those structures ‘model’ the set-theoretical pred-
icate if not in the Tarskian sense of satisfaction and truth?
   The whole point is that we can prove within set theory that the structures
in the relevant class have the properties demanded by the set-theoretical
predicate. Let us consider, for instance, the case of the real vector space
Rn ¼ hRn ; R; þ; i. Following the traditional mathematical practice, we
simply prove inside set theory itself that the structures ‘satisfy’ the postu-
lates of vector space, which we represent by writing
    Rn     ðvector space axiomsÞ;                                                   ð6:1Þ

where ⊨ is to be understood in the usual semantical consequence symbol.
This means that, once we obtain the ‘ingredients’ of the structure in set
theory, which are just sets (here we are avoiding the Urelemente), all we
do is prove those sentences in the language of set theory as theorems of
set theory (probably expanded by new symbols) that express the postulates
of vector spaces for this particular sample. For instance, in order to show
that Rn 9O8aðO þ a ¼ aÞ, we take O ¼ h0, . . . , 0i and α ¼ hx1, . . . ,
xni and then show that
    O þ a ¼ h0; . . . ; 0i þ hx1 ; . . . ; xn i ¼ h0 þ x1 ; . . . ; 0 þ xn i ¼ a:

  That is, using the terminology with some care but in a very clear way, we
show that
    ðSet theoryÞ ‘ ð A        ðvector space axiomsÞ Þ:

   That is, as Suppes says, we are working with mathematics and not with
metamathematics. This shows that the notion of satisfaction of the postu-
lates by a structure, in Suppes’s approach, is purely syntactical, consisting
of mathematical proofs inside set theory. An even simpler example is the
set ω of natural numbers, which is usually constructed inside set theory
(ZFC, for instance). The typical proof that this set satisfies the Peano Pos-
tulates does not proceed in association with the relevant elements of the set
with a formal language. Rather, what we usually do is provide for a proof
inside set theory itself that there is a first element (the empty set), a sucessor
function working as expected, and ω is inductive (see chapter 3 and
[End.77] for further details).
116 Models and Scientific Theories
   Now, with these features in mind, we can characterize a scientific theory
according to Suppes’s ‘semantic’ view: let P be the set-theoretical predicate
that axiomatizes a certain theory T, and A a structure that satisfies the
predicate. This structure is built with elements of a scale ε(D), where D
is the domain of the structure (in our sample case, Rn ). As a set (in most
cases for scientific theories), each structure belongs to some Vα of the cumu-
lative hierarchy, so, we can write in a short notation (suggested in
[Mul.11]):

    T ¼ fA 2 Va : PðAÞg;                                                 ð6:2Þ

which means that a theory is a collection (not a set of standard set theories,
perhaps a proper class)3 of structures that model the set-theoretical
predicate.
   Recall from the discussion in the previous chapter that a set-theoretical
predicate, in the sense considered by Suppes, is able to select very specific
classes of structures. It may provide for a selection of so-called intended
models of a theory, leaving aside models that merely have the desired
formal properties but that are of no relevance for the empirical study the
theory was developed for. This will contrast with the classes of structures
selected by the da Costa–Chuaqui approach, which we will explain soon,
where one cannot ‘exclude’ some specific unintended structures from
being inside the class comprising (representing) the theory.
   So, in a sense, Suppes’s own approach is not really a ‘semantic’ ap-
proach. Muller [Mul.11, sec.6] has noticed that, and Suppes [Sups.11]
agreed. Then, even though Suppes himself mentioned the Tarskian tradition
of models as encapsulating precisely the kind of model needed in science
(for instance, in [Sups.62]), in the end, Suppes recognized that the models
he needed are of a distinct nature. In fact, this approach is more likely to
be useful when one is interested, as Suppes was, in the relation between
theory and experiments. The simplicity of the approach leads one to deal
more directly with such issues.
   That last point is important for a discussion that was already raised in
the first chapter: how can one make sense of the fact that we are ‘axioma-
tizing a theory’, an informal and pre-given theory T, and afterward, as it
were, to develop a set-theoretical surrogate for it? Recall that there is a
simple way out for that. In fact, following French [Fre.15], we are not
claiming that an informal theory must be identified with its set-theoretical
counterpart; the set-theoretical construction serves specific purposes, and in
the case of Suppes, as he clearly stated in his [Sups.67], two of the main pur-
poses are the search for a better understanding of the relation between data
and theory and the study of theories even in the absence of standard axi-
omatizations. The main problem appears, recall, when one reifies a set-
theoretical construction and then must face the battle of proving this to
be the ‘correct’ reification against seemingly equivalent reifications.
                                       Models and Scientific Theories     117
   Thus we have arrived at a possible characterization of scientific theories.
This is the first step for the discussion of philosophical points of interest,
such as the relation of theory with experience, the characterization of con-
cepts such as empirical adequacy, and many others. Bas van Fraassen, for in-
stance, advocates this approach and complements that we should look for
empirically adequate theories [vanF.80], instead of the traditional search
for ‘true theories’. Here we will not enter this discussion; our aim is to
proceed and present the da Costa–Chuaqui approach and, later, comment
on how metamathematical issues impinge on such characterizations.


6.3    DA COSTA AND CHUAQUI, FURTHER REMARKS

Now, let us turn again to the approach by da Costa and Chuaqui to scientific
theories. As we have already seen, differently from the approach of Suppes,
this is a semantic approach in the traditional Tarskian style of semantics.
However, differently from what is usually thought in the literature about
the semantic approach, the relevant languages and structures involved need
not be restricted to the elementary case, or order-1 structures (recall our
example of axiomatization of classical particle mechanics in the previous
chapter). Higher-order languages and structures are allowed, and, in fact,
they seem to be even required when it comes to most empirical theories.
   What is more relevant is that, in this case, there is a sensible interpreta-
tion of a formal language (recall our discussion in the previous chapter
about the language of a structure). It is in the language of the structure
that one may write the postulates of the theory. In this sense, a theory is
a class of models of a set of postulates written in a specific language.
More precisely, given the language £ for a species of structures, and given
a set of postulates adequate A£ for that theory, the theory may be charac-
terized by the class
      fA : A   A£ g:

Here, recall, just as it happened in the case of the Suppes approach, there is
no problem with the fact that we are using a theory, in the informal sense,
to construct a set-theoretical representation for philosophical purposes. But
once we have the approach by Suppes, what are the advantages of following
this traditional approach with formal languages and axiomatization of the
whole step theories?
   This is an important question, and we have already mentioned some pos-
sible answers that it may suggest. Formalization of a theory brings with it
much that may count as advantage. For instance, the discovery of unin-
tended models (which is deemed a disadvantage by some adherents of the
semantic approach) has proven very helpful in recent times (more on this
soon, with relation to the metalanguage). For another advantage, recall
118 Models and Scientific Theories
that formalization opens the door for the use of formal methods that may
allow us to obtain results that, at a purely informal level, are not easily
achievable (see again chapter 2).
    But perhaps the most interesting kind of result that the da Costa–
Chuaqui approach allows concerns some problems related to theory equiv-
alence. Recall from chapter 1 that a difficult challenge appears for those
identifying a theory either with a class of models or else with a specific lin-
guistic formulation: in the case of the semantic approach, alternative classes
may reasonably claim the rights of representing the same theory; in the case
of the syntactic approach, distinct linguistic formulations may be employed
to characterize the same theory. Even those giving up identification, as we
are doing, owe an account of how distinct representations may be reason-
ably employed to represent the same theory. As we discussed in chapter 1,
the main general claim is that theory equivalence is achievable in the pres-
ence of a language for the structure. That is precisely what we have in the
da Costa–Chuaqui approach.
    The approach by da Costa and Chuaqui offers a great opportunity for
the rigorous study of equivalent theories in the precise sense that we shall
present now, rather briefly. Here we shall rely on the exposition on defin-
ability presented in the previous chapter and on the general development
of those concepts by da Costa and Rodrigues [Cos.07]. In that work, da
Costa and Rodrigues relate definability problems with certain kinds of in-
variance by automorphism in a structure. The group of automorphisms
of a structure is the Galois group of that structure. The authors are able
to generalize model theoretic notions and some tools of model theory for
higher-order languages and structures. By considering infinitary higher-
order languages as the language of our structure, following [Cos.07], we
shall call a concept definable in this language as being definable in the
wide sense. Now, two structures A and A0 are equivalent, written A  A0
if and only if the primitive relations of each of them are definable in
terms of the primitive relations of the other. So we may think of two struc-
tures with distinct signatures as presenting the same theory only when they
are equivalent in this sense.
    What is more relevant for us now is that this notion of equivalence (which
is somehow advanced in [Hal.12, Hal.15] and [Lut.15]) also has a model the-
oretic counterpart. As a consequence of the work by da Costa and Rodrigues,
as well as da Costa and Bueno [Cos.11, p.157], we can state a theorem with
necessary and sufficient conditions for equivalence: a given object r is defin-
able in a certain vocabulary on the basis of a certain set of hypotheses Γ if and
only if, for every structure A modeling Γ, r is invariant by the Galois group of
the restriction A0 of A to the language without the symbol denoting r (for
details, see [Cos.07, Cos.11]).
    Now this may be a first step in the study of equivalence of theories. What
is interesting is that the Galois group of structures (theories)4 provides inter-
esting techniques, relating syntactical aspects that are not always fully
                                      Models and Scientific Theories     119
developed with model theoretic tools for the equivalence of theories. This
is, as we mentioned, the first step in such studies, and may, perhaps,
replace the debates on which approach is the ‘correct’ one: the syntactical
or the semantic. They are both required, and the correct development of
their relations may bring useful results for the philosophy of science as a
discipline.
   Obviously, this is a kind of metamathematical study of theories. This
simply puts the metamathematical resources in the center of the stage in
the philosophy of science again, or at least, in part of it. We shall now
explore a little more about this aspect of the study of theories, while con-
centrating on the role of the metamathematical apparatus.


6.4   THE METAMATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK

In order to illustrate why the consideration of the mathematics where the
discussion is being developed is so relevant, let us advance some case
studies as an attempt to raise the issue. This is what we shall do now.
    It is well known that quantum mechanics needs unbounded operators,
such as position and momentum operators [Hea.90]. An unbounded oper-
ator T is a linear operator (here supposed over a suitable Hilbert space H)
such that for any M > 0 there exists a vector α such that ||Tα|| > M.||α||.
Otherwise, T is bounded. Now consider the theory ZFþDC, where DC
stands for a weakened form of the Axiom of Choice, entailing that a ‘count-
able’ form of the Axiom of Choice can be obtained. (In particular, if {Bn : n
2 ω} is a countable collection of non-empty sets, then it follows from DC
that there exists a choice function f with domain ω such that f(n) 2 Bn
for each n 2 ω.) It can then be proven, as Solovay showed, that in
ZFþDC (which is supposed to be consistent) the proposition “Every
subset of R is Lebesgue measurable” cannot be disproved.5 This proposition
is false in standard ZFC. The same happens with the proposition “Each
linear operator on a Hilbert space is bounded” [Mai.73]. This kind of
result poses a difficulty to the friends of the semantic view: when we
speak of the models of a scientific theory, such as quantum mechanics,
which metamathematics should we use to define its models? Presumably,
it cannot be Solovay’s model in ZFþDC, since we need unbounded opera-
tors. So the choice of a suitable metamathematics is crucial. The character-
ization of a scientific theory according to the semantic approach is sensible
to the mathematical apparatus employed in the very construction of those
models!
    As a second example, let us acknowledge that in the standard Hilbert
space formalism for quantum mechanics, we deal with bases for the rele-
vant Hilbert spaces. More specifically, we deal with orthonormal bases
formed by eigenvectors of certain Hermitean operators. This is possible
because we can prove, using the Axiom of Choice (which is part of the
120 Models and Scientific Theories
metatheory used here, essentially ZFU, so we are supposing the existence of
Urelemente) that any Hilbert space H has a basis. Moreover, it can also be
shown that each basis has a specific cardinality, which is the same for all
bases of H (this is defined to be the dimension of the space). But in
certain set theories in which the Axiom of Choice does not hold in full gen-
erality, such as in Laüchi’s permutation models, we obtain: (a) vector spaces
with no basis, and (b) a vector space that has two bases of different cardi-
nalities [Jec.77, p.366]. Now if a vector space has no basis, it seems that it
cannot be used as part of the standard formalism of quantum mechanics.
The latter formalism presupposes the availability of suitable bases. As a
result, again we see it very clearly that the theory, understood as a class
of models, depends crucially on the metamathematics that is used. Of
course it seems interesting for the philosophy of science to study such
models as well as possible models of a scientific theory.
   Our third example also comes from quantum mechanics (for details, see
[KraBue.07]). In order to keep the example self-contained, we recall that in
the 1920s, Thoralf Skolem noticed that there are concepts that are, as it
were, the same in all models of, say, ZFC (these concepts are termed abso-
lute). For instance, the concept of ‘ordinal’ does not change from model to
model as the concept of ‘cardinal’ does (these are called relative concepts.
For example, if ZFC is formulated as a first-order theory, if consistent, it
has a countable model due to the Lowënheim-Skolem theorem. But, in
this model, the set of real numbers, which can be constructed in ZFC
(say by Dedekind cuts), must be countable—a fact that seems to contradict
‘Cantor’s theorem’, according to which there is no bijection between the set
of real numbers and the set of natural numbers. However, as Skolem
himself noticed, this result does not lead to a ‘real’ paradox, for the bijec-
tion may exist outside the countable model, and not as a set of ZFC
proper [Sko.22]. But, in the standard model of ZFC, the cardinality of
the set of the real numbers cannot be denumerable, as Cantor’s theorem
teaches us. This result shows that the set of real numbers may have different
cardinalities depending on the model we consider, and this happens in
general for other sets.
   The relativism of the notion of a cardinal number can be seen with this
simple example.6 Suppose that our theory makes use of the set
A ¼ f2@0 ; @a g, where α is a cardinal. How many elements does this set
have? Well, it depends on the model of set theory we are considering.
Really, if the Continuum Hypothesis holds,7 the set has just one element,
but it has more than one otherwise (say, when 2@0 ¼ @o ).
   Let us take this result in mind for what follows. After presenting his modal
interpretation of quantum mechanics, Bas van Fraassen addresses the
problem of identical particles in quantum physics, which he regards as one
of the three main issues in the philosophical discussion on quantum mechan-
ics [vanF.91, p.133]. And he notes, “identical particles [. . .] are certainly
qualitatively the same, in all the respects represented in quantum-mechanical
                                       Models and Scientific Theories     121
models—yet still numerically distinct” (ibid., p. 376). In a previous paper, he
was still more explicit, insisting that “if two particles are of the same kind,
and have the same state of motion, nothing in the quantum-mechanical de-
scription distinguishes them. Yet this is possible” [vanF.84].
    Van Fraassen’s quotations are intriguing. Particles of the same kind and
in the same state of motion are ‘identical’, in physicists’ jargon, and accord-
ing to their standards, nothing can distinguish them. So if they cannot be
distinguished within the quantum-mechanical formalism, how can they
still be distinguished at all? The answer, we suggest—following the parallel
case made by Skolem in set theory—is that the particles can be distin-
guished outside the framework of quantum mechanics. But what does
this mean? As we have seen, in the foundations of set theory, considerations
regarding what holds inside or outside a certain model are quite common.
But can we make sense of this way of speaking in the philosophy of science
as well?
    Van Fraassen’s modal interpretation of quantum mechanics takes
quantum propositions as modal statements, which give “first and foremost
about what can and what must happen, and only indirectly about what ac-
tually does happen” [vanF.80]. In other words, the modal account, by of-
fering an interpretation of quantum mechanics, spells out how the world
could be if quantum mechanics were true [vanF.91, p.242]. To motivate
his proposal, van Fraassen recalls one of the most intriguing features of
quantum physics, namely, the sense in which quantum mechanics is an in-
deterministic theory. Although the dynamics of an isolated system evolves
according to Schrödinger’s equation (hence deterministically), the system
as a whole cannot be analyzed in terms of its component parts. So, appar-
ently, the quantum-mechanical state of the whole system contains only in-
complete information about the system. Bohr’s proposal, recalls van
Fraassen, emphasizes that it is still possible to have complete information
about the system, given that the states of the system’s components and
the state of the whole system do not determine each other [vanF.80].
As a result, on the basis of the state of a complete system X þ Y, we can
in general ascribe at most mixed states to X and Y, but from them
nothing can be said back about the state of the whole system. As van Fraas-
sen notes:

    [I]f we can predict the future states of an isolated system on the basis of
    its present state [by means of Schrödinger’s equation], then how can we
    be ignorant about the future events involving its components unless the
    information in those total states is incomplete? For surely any true de-
    scription of a component is a partial but true description of the whole?
                                                                        (ibid.)

  Van Fraassen’s answer is obtained from a distinction between quantum
dynamical states and experimental events. The former are what a vector or
122 Models and Scientific Theories
a statistical operator represents. They are things completely embedded in
the theory, whose evolution is governed by dynamical laws. In other
words, we can say that dynamical states are described within the formalism
of quantum mechanics. Events, on the contrary, are extra-theoretic entities
that satisfy the probability calculations in the sense that physicists do in
quantum theory.
   The same conceptual distinction can be drawn by distinguishing between
state attributions and value attributions of a physical system. The former is
a theoretic construct, and part of the challenge involved in theory’s con-
struction depends upon a proper representation of these states. Value attri-
butions, in turn, express values that an observable actually has. Since the
point is important for our argument, let us consider it in more detail.
   A value state is specified by stating which observables have values and
what they are. A value-attributing proposition then states that an observable
m actually has a value in a (Borel) set E (in symbols, hm, Ei. The connection
between them is that value states are truth-makers of value attributing prop-
ositions [vanF.91, pp.275–6]. On the other hand, we have the dynamic state,
which states how the system will evolve, either in isolation or in interaction
with another system. A state-attributing proposition then states that a mea-
surement of an observable m must have a value in a (Borel) set E (in
symbols, [m, E]. Again, dynamic states and state-attributing propositions
are connected by the fact that the former are what make the latter true.
Now the crucial feature of the modal account is to distinguish value- and
state-attributing propositions. The motivation for this distinction comes
from difficulties faced by the standard interpretation of quantum mechanics,
as articulated by von Neumann, for not distinguishing them.
   Von Neumann’s interpretation of quantum mechanics identifies these
two concepts. After all, not only does von Neumann consider that a
system can be said to posses a value of a certain variable when it is in an
eigenstate of the corresponding observable, but he also accepts that if the
state vector is not an eigenstate of some observable, then it has no value
at all (see also [Bit.96, p.149]). In this case, the system is supposed to be
characterized by a well-defined value of the observable when the probabil-
ity is 1. But if this probability is not 1, then the observable is supposed to
have no value at all. To remove this discontinuity, van Fraassen offers an
account according to which probability ascriptions are not equivalent to
value ascriptions (ibid.).
   On von Neumann’s interpretation, attributions of values and classification
of states are closely related: an observable B has value b if and only if a B-
measurement is certain to have outcome b (where b is a real number). The
problem here is that in order to accommodate states for which measurement
has uncertain outcomes, von Neumann made a radical move: if the outcome
of a measurement of B is uncertain, B has no value at all [vanF.91, p.274]. To
avoid this answer, the modal interpretation introduces the distinction
between values and states. With this distinction in place, the introduction
                                         Models and Scientific Theories       123
of ‘unsharp’ values of observables is allowed. And this is how the possibility
of uncertain outcomes in measurement can be accommodated.8 As van Fraas-
sen points out [vanF.91, pp. 280–1], if a physical system X has dynamic state
(represented by an operator) W at a time t, the state-attributions [M, E] that
are true are those such that TrðWIEM Þ ¼ 1.9 As opposed to state-attributions,
value-attributions cannot be deduced from the dynamic state. But, according
to van Fraassen, they are constrained in three ways:10 (i) if [M, E] is true, so is
the value-attribution hm, Ei; that is, observable M has value in E; (ii) all true
value-attributions could have probability 1 together; and (iii) the set of true
value-attributions is maximal with respect to feature (ii) [vanF.91, p. 281]. So
the assignment of truth-conditions to state- and value-attributing proposi-
tions is crucial to spell out the difference between them (the former, but
not the latter, can be deduced from the dynamic state).
    To sum up, there is an important distinction between state-attribution
and value-attribution, or between states and events, and this distinction
cannot be reduced to something more basic. States, as already noted, are
described in the scope of (the formalism of) quantum mechanics by
vectors of an appropriate Hilbert space, while events are not. After all,
events are statements such as Observable B pertaining to system X has
value b, and such events are described if they are assigned probabilities,
but “they are not the same thing as the states which assign them probabil-
ities” [vanF.91, p. 279].
    The distinction between states and events is similar to the distinction
between absolute and relative notions in set theory discussed earlier, at
least in the following way: we are contrasting intra-theoretic properties
with properties that hold outside the models under consideration. It’s
curious that when Skolem introduced his ‘paradox’, he intended to use it
to show the inadequacy of set theory as a foundation for mathematics.
The outcome, however, was precisely the opposite. His result was incorpo-
rated as part of the rich conceptual framework offered by set-theoretic
notions. Similarly, van Fraassen developed the modal interpretation of
quantum mechanics as part of a defense of an empiricist view. In the end,
however, the modal interpretation became part the revival of realist inter-
pretations of quantum theory.
    It should now be clear that both in the philosophy of science and in the
foundations of set theory there is room for discussing what holds ‘inside’ a
particular model (or formalism) and what holds ‘outside’ the model (for-
malism). If a theory is presented as a class of models, it makes perfect
sense to ask whether there are concepts that remain the same in all
models and concepts that change from model to model—that is, that
have a certain extension ‘inside’ a model, but a different one in another
model or when considered outside the model.
    Finally, let’s examine another case. Consider the concept of indistin-
guishable (or indiscernible) objects. The idea of indiscernibility is of funda-
mental importance in contemporary physics (for a historical account and
124 Models and Scientific Theories
further discussion, see [FreKra.06]). Standard mathematics and classical
logic imply that every object is an individual, in the sense that each
object can always be distinguished from any other at least in principle,
and these individuals retain their individuality even when mixed with
others of similar species.11 As a result, to accommodate indistinguishable
objects, some mathematical trick needs to be introduced.
    In quantum mechanics, this is done by imposing some kind of symmetry
condition. Suppose we are to describe how two identical bosons, 1 and 2,
can be distributed in two possible states, A and B. As is well known, the
vectors in the relevant Hilbert space are jcA1 ijcA2 i, which states that both
bosons are in A, while jcB1 ijcB2 i states that both are in B, and p12 jcA1 ijcB2 i þ
p1 jc ijc i states that one of them is in A and the other is in B. Thus the in-
      A   B
  2   2   1
distinguishability between bosons 1 and 2 (in the third case) emerges from the
symmetry of the function, which is invariant by permutations of the labels.
Some people claim that the individuality of quantum objects is then lost. Ac-
cording to our point of view, there is nothing to be lost, for in one of the pos-
sible approaches to the subject, these objects do not have identity conditions
to start with [FreKra.06]. The artificiality of the problem is that these objects
were first assumed to be individuals by their labels 1 and 2. Thus, by an ad-
equate choice of the relevant vectors, we have made them indiscernible.
However, the objects cannot be said to be indiscernible outside the frame-
work (say, ZFC), since we can distinguish them—e.g., by their labels 1 and
2. In this way, the notion of indistinguishable object seems to be relative.
    The mathematical trick we used consists of limiting the discourse to the
scope of a certain set-theoretic structure (as we saw, the models of quantum
physics can be taken to be structures of this kind). We then consider as in-
discernible those objects that are invariant by the automorphisms of the
structure. Now in ZFC any structure can be extended to a rigid structure,
that is, to a structure where the only automorphism is the identity function.
Hence, in the rigid structure (the whole ZFC model V ¼ hV; 2i is rigid), any
object is an individual. In short, there are no truly indiscernible objects in
standard mathematics (and logic). A suitable mathematics for developing
quantum mechanics taking the non-individuality of quantum objects from
the start needs to be taken into account; we have developed quasi-set
theory for that, but this subject extrapolates the contents of this book
(the interested reader can have a look at [FreKra.06]; [KraAre.15]).


NOTES

    1. As before, here we concentrate on relations only, since distinguished ele-
       ments and operations can be viewed as particular relations.
    2. The postulates are: (1) ; and X belong to τ, (2) any finite intersection of el-
       ements of τ belongs to τ, and (3) any reunion of elements of τ belongs to τ,
       which can be seen in any book of topology (the first postulate is implied by
       the other two [Bou.95, chap.1]).
                                           Models and Scientific Theories           125
 3. In the von Neumann-Bernays-Gödel (NBG) set theory, the primitive ele-
    ments are classes, and sets, which are copies of the ZFC sets, are classes
    that belong to other classes. The classes that do not belong to other classes
    are called proper classes. These entities lie outside ZFC.
 4. The Galois group of a theory is the Galois group of the structures that model
    the set-theoretical predicate that axiomatize the theory.
 5. The Lebesgue measure generalizes the usual notion of ‘measure’ of a set, say
    the length of an interval, the area of a plane figure, the volume of a tridimen-
    sional figure. The precise definition is not necessary here.
 6. We owe this example to A.M.N. Coelho.
 7. Cantor’s Continuum Hypothesis says that there is no set of real numbers
    with cardinality between the cardinality of the natural numbers (@0) and
    the cardinality of the set of real numbers, c (for ‘continuum’). But Cantor
    himself proved that 2@0 ¼ c, and postulated that the next cardinal number
    after @0, termed @1, is precisely c. The generalized continuum hypothesis
    (GCH) says that 2@a ¼ @aþ1 ; it was known from Sierpinski that ZFþGCH
    implies the Axiom of Choice. It was later shown by Gödel and Cohen that
    this hypothesis is independent of the axioms of ZF (without choice).
 8. Note that the value-state distinction is cashed out in terms of the concept of
    truth. The relationship between these ideas and the concept of quasi-truth is
    developed in [Bue.00].
 9. A few comments about the notation: (a) Tr is a linear functional of operators
    into numbers (the trace map), which gives us the probability that a measure-
    ment of the observable m has a value in the Borel set E; (b) IEM is an Hermi-
    tean operator such that IEM ðxÞ ¼ x if M(x) ¼ ax for some a 2 E and is the null
    vector if M(x) ¼ bx for some value b 2   = E, where M is the Hermitian opera-
    tor, which represents m; and (c) that the trace function Tr provides a prob-
    ability is due to the fact that Pmx ðEÞ ¼ ðx  IEM xÞ ¼ TrðIx IEM Þ, where Pmx ðEÞ is
    the probability that a measurement of m has a value in E, ðx  IEM xÞ is the
    inner product of x and IEM x and Ix is the projection on the subspace [x]
    spanned by x. For details, see [vanF.91, pp. 147–52, 157–65, and 280–1].
10. Which again are spelled out in terms of truth.
11. Although the concepts of individuality and distinguishability should not be
    confused; see [FreKra.06].
This page intentionally left blank
Bibliography




[All.38] Allen, E. S. 1938, Review of The Axiomatic Method in Biology, by J. H.
   Woodger. Cambridge, University Press, 1937. 10þ174 p. Bull. Amer. Math.
   Soc., Vol. 44 (11): 763
[AreKra.14] Arenhart, J.R.B. and Krause, D. 2014, From primitive identity to the
   non-individuality of quantum objects. Studies in History and Philosophy of
   Modern Physics 46 (B): 273
[Aris.89] Aristotle 1989, Prior Analytics. Trans. Robin Smith. Cambridge: India-
   napolis, Hackett Pu.
[Arn.97] Arnol’d W., 1995, Will mathematics survive? The Mathematical Intelli-
   gencer 7 (3), 6
[BarMac.75] Barnes, D. W. and Mack, J. M. 1975, An Algebraic Introduction to
   Mathematical Logic. New York, Heidelberg, Berlim: Springer-Verlag.
[Bell.09] Bell, J. L. 2009, ‘Infinitary Logic’, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philoso-
   phy (Spring 2009 Edition), URL = <http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2016/
   entries/logic-infinitary/>. Access date: 10/04/2016.
[Bit.96] Bitbol, M. 1996. Schrödinger’s philosophy of quantum mechanics. Dor-
   drecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
[Bla.14] Blanchette, P. 2014, The Frege-Hilbert Controversy, The Stanford Encyclo-
   pedia of Philosophy (Spring 2014 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL ¼
   <http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2014/entries/frege-hilbert/>. Access date:
   01/08/2015.
[Bli.88] Blizard, W. D. 1988, Multiset theory. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic
   30 (1): 36–66.
[Bog.79] Bogdan, R. 1979, Patrick Suppes. Dordrecht: D.Reidel.
[Bou.50] Bourbaki, N. 1950, The architecture of mathematics. The American Math-
   ematical Monthly, Vol. 57, No. 4, p. 221
[Bou.68] Bourbaki, N. 1968, Theory of Sets. Paris: Hermann and Addison-Wesley.
[Bou.90] Bourbaki, N. 1990, Théorie des Ensembles. Paris: Masson.
[BrigCos.71] Brignole, D. and da Costa, N.C.A. 1971, On Supernormal
   Ehresmann-Dedecker Universes. Mathematische Zeitschrift (122), p. 342
[Bue.00] Bueno, O. 2000, Quasi-truth in quasi-set theory. Synthese 125: 33–53.
[Can.55] Cantor. G. 1955, Contribution to the Founding of the Theory of Transfi-
   nite Numbers. New York: Dover.
[Cao.99] Cao, T. Y. 1999, Conceptual Foundations of Quantum Field Theory.
   Cambridge: Cambridge Un. Press.
[Car.58] Carnap, R. 1958, Introduction to Symbolic Logic and Its Applications.
   New York: Dover.
[Con.06] Contessa, G. 2006, Scientific models, partial structures and the new re-
   ceived view of theories. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 37: 370–77.
128 Bibliography
[Cor.92] Corry, L. 1992, Nicolas Bourbaki and the concept of mathematical struc-
   ture, Synthese 92 (3): 315–48.
[Cor.04] Corry, L. 2004, Modern Algebra and the Rise of Mathematical Structures.
   2nd.ed., Basel: Springer.
[Cos.80] da Costa. N.C.A. 1980, Ensaio sobre os fundamentos da lógica (in portu-
   guese). 1st ed. São Paulo: Hucitec.
[Cos.07] da Costa, N.C.A. 2007, Abstract Logics, Manuscript, Federal University of
   Santa Catarina (not published).
[Cos.11] da Costa, N.C.A. and Bueno, O. 2011. Remarks on Abstract Galois
   Theory. Manuscrito 341: 151
[CosChu.88] da Costa, N.C.A. and Chuaqui, R. 1988, ‘On Suppes’ set theoretical
   predicates’, Erkenntnis 29, 95
[CosFre.03] da Costa, N.C.A. and French, S. 2003, Science and Partial Truth: A
   Unitary Approach to Models and Scientific Reasoning. Oxford: Oxford Un.
   Press.
[CosRod.07] da Costa, N.C.A. and Rodrigues, A.M.N. 2007, ‘Definability and in-
   variance’, Studia Logica 82, 1–30.
[CosDor.08] da Costa, N.C.A. and Doria, F. A. 2008, On the Foundations of
   Science, COPPE/UFRJ, Cadernos do Grupo de Altos Estudos, Vol. II. Rio de
   Janeiro: Editora E-Papers.
[CosKraBue.06] da Costa, N.C.A., Krause, D. and Bueno, O. 2006, ‘Paraconsistent
   logics and paraconsistency’, in in D. Jacquette, D. M.Gabbay, P.Thagard and J.
   Woods (eds.), Philosophy of Logic, Amsterdam: Elsevier, in the series Handbook
   of the Philosophy of Science, v. 5, 655–781.
[CovHaw.04] Cover, J. A. and O’leary-Hawthorne, J. 2004, Substance and Individ-
   uation in Leibniz. Cambridge, Cambridge Un. Press.
[DalGiuGre.04] Dalla Chiara, Giuntini, R., and Greechie, R. 2004, Reasoning in
   Quantum Theory: Sharp and Unsharp Quantum Logics. Dordrecht: Kluwer
   Ac. Press (Trends in Logic, vol.22).
[DalTor.93] Dalla Chiara, and Toraldo di Francia, G. 1993, ‘Individuals, kinds and
   names in physics’, in Corsi, G., Dalla Chiara, M. L. and Ghirardi, G. C. (eds.),
   Bridging the Gap: Philosophy, Mathematics, and Physics, Dordrecht: Kluwer
   Ac. Press (Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 140), 261
[Dan.et al.02] Daniel F. Styer, Miranda S. Balkin, Kathryn M. Becker, Matthew R.
   Burns, Christopher E. Dudley, Scott T. Forth, Jeremy S. Gaumer, Mark A.
   Kramer, David C. Oertel, Leonard H. Park, Marie T. Rinkoski, Clait T.
   Smith, Timothy D. Wotherspoon. 2002. Nine formulations of quantum mechan-
   ics. Am. J. Physics 70 (3): 288–97.
[Dau.90] Dauben, J. W. 1990, Georg Cantor: His Mathematics and Philosophy of
   the Infinite. Princeton: Princeton Un. Press.
[D’Es.03] D’Espagnat, B. 2003, Veiled Reality: An Analysis of Present-Day
   Quantum Mechanical Concepts. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
[D’Es.06] D’Espagnat, B. 2006, On Physics and Philosophy. Princeton: Princeton
   University Press.
[DomHol.07] Domenech, G. and Holik, F. 2007, ‘A discussion on particle number
   and quantum indistinguishability’, Foundations of Physics 37 (6): 855
[DomHolKra.08] Domenech, G., Holik, F. and Krause, D. 2008, ‘Q-spaces and
   the foundations of quantum mechanics’, Foundations of Physics 38 (11) 969.
[DomHolKniKra.08]
[Dou.11] Douven, I. 2011, ‘Abduction’, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
   (Spring 2011 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL ¼ <http://plato.stanford.
   edu/archives/spr2011/entries/abduction/>. Access date: 01/08/2015.
                                                                Bibliography      129
[DutRec.15] Dutilh Novaes, C. and Reck, E. 2015, Carnapian explications, formal-
   isms as cognitive tools, and the paradox of adequate formalization. Forthcoming
   in Synthese, DOI 10.1007/s11229–015–0816-z, 2015.
[EinInf.38] Einstein, A. and Infeld. L. 1938, The Evolution of Physics. New York:
   Simon and Schuster.
[End.77] Enderton, H. B. 1977, Elements of Set Theory. New York: Academic Press.
[Esan.13] Esanu, A. 2013, Evolutionary biology and the axiomatic method revisited,
   The Romanian Journal of Analytic Philosophy, Vol. VII (1): 19–41.
[Eucl.08] Euclid 2008, Euclid’s Element of Geometry. English translation,
   by Richard Fitzpatrick http://farside.ph.utexas.edu/Books/Euclid/Elements.pdf.
   Access date: 01/08/2015.
[Fra.66] Fraenkel, A. A. 1966, Abstract Set Theory Amsterdam: North Holland.
[FraBarLev.73] Fraenkel, A. A., Bar-Hillel, Y. and Levy, A. 1973, Foundations of
   Set Theory. 2nd. ed. Amsterdam and London: North-Holland.
[Fra.82] Franco de Oliveira, A. J. 1982, Teoria de Conjuntos, Intuitiva e Axiomática
   Lisboa: Livraria Escolar Editora.
[Fre.15] French, S. 2015, (Structural) realism and its representational vehicles.
   Synthese, DOI: 10.1007/s11229–015–0879-x, 2015.
[FreKra.06] French, S. and Krause, D. 2006, Identity in Physics: A Historical, Phil-
   osophical, and Formal Analysis Oxford: Oxford Un. Press.
[FreKra.09] French, S. and Krause, D. 2009, Remarks on the theory of quasi-sets.
   Studia Logica 95 (1–2): 101–12.
[FreLad.03] French, S. and Ladyman, J. 2003, Remodelling structural realism:
   quantum physics and the metaphysics of structure Synthese 36 31–56.
[GlaGio.00] Glashow, S. L. Georgi, H. 2000, La teorı́a unificada de las fuerzas de
   las partı́culas elementales. In Glashow, S. L., El Encanto de la Fı́sica. Barcelona:
   Tusquets. Original The Charm of Physics, 1991.
[Ger.85] Geroch, R. 1985, Mathematical Physics Chicago: Chicago Un. Press.
[Gra.08] Gratzer, G. A. 2008, Universal Algebra New York: Springer.
[Gra.00] Gray, J. J. 2000, The Hilbert Challenge Oxford: Oxford Un. Press.
[Gro.99] Gross, D., 1999, The triumph and limitations of quantum field theory. In
   [Cao.99], pp. 56–67.
[Hal.12] Halvorson, H. 2012, What scientific theories could not be. Philosophy of
   science 79 (2) 183–206.
[Hal.15] Halvorson, H. 2015, Scientific Theories. Forthcoming in The Oxford
   Handbook of Philosophy of Science.
[Hea.90] Heathcote, A. 1990, Unbounded operators and the incompleteness of
   quantum mechanics. Philosophy of Science 57: 523–34.
[Hei.89] Heisenberg, W. 1989, Physics and Philosophy. London: Penguin Books.
[Hen.et al.59] Henkin, L., Suppes, P. & Tarski, A. (eds.) 1959, The Axiomatic
   Method with Special Reference to Geometry and Physics. Amsterdam: North-
   Holland.
[Hil.30] Hilbert, D. 1930, ‘Address to the Society of German Scientists and Physi-
   cians’, 8th September 1930.
[Hil.50] Hilbert, D. 1950, Foundations of Geometry (English translation by E. J.
   Townsend), La Salle, Open Court.
[Hil.76] Hilbert, D. 1976, Mathematical Problems. In Browder, F. E. (ed.), Proceed-
   ings of Symposium in Pure and Applied Mathematics: Mathematical Problems
   Arising from Hilbert Problems. Providence: American Mathematical Society,
   Vol.CCVIII, Part. I, pp. 1–34.
[Hil.96] Hilbert, D. 1996, Axiomatic thought. In Ewald, W. B. (ed.), From Kant to
   Hilbert. A Source Book in the Foundations of Mathematics, vol. 2. Oxford:
   Oxford University Press, pp. 1089–1096.
130 Bibliography
[HilAck.50] Hilbert, D. and Ackermann, W. 1950, Principles of Mathematical
   Logic. Providence: American Mathematical Society.
[Hod.01] Hodges, W. 2001, Elementary Predicate Logic. In Gabbay, Dov. M., and
   Guenthner, F., (eds.) Handbook of Philosophical Logic, vol. 1, 2nd. ed., 2001,
   Dordrecht: Springer.
[Hof.79] Hoffstadter, D. R. 1979, Gödel, Escher, and Bach: an Eternal Golden
   Braid. New York: Basic Books.
[Ign.96] Ignatieff, Y. (ed.) 1996, The Mathematical World of Walter Noll. Berlin
   and Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.
[Jam.62] Jammer, M. 1962, The Concepts of Force. New York: Harper Torchbook.
[Jam.74] Jammer, M. 1974, The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics. New York: John
   Wiley & Sons.
[Jau.68] Jauch, J. M 1968, Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. Cambridge:
   Addison Wesley.
[Jec.77] Jech, T. 1977, About the axiom of choice. In J. Barwise (ed.), Handbook of
   Mathematical Logic Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 345–70.
[JonBet.10] Jong, R. de and Betti, A. 2010, The classical model of science: a millen-
   nia-old model of scientific rationality. Synthese 174: 185–203.
[Jong.85] Jongeling, T. B. 1985, On an axiomatization of evolutionary theory,
   J. Theoretical Biology 117: 529–43.
[Kne.63] Kneebone, G. T. 1963, Mathematical Logic and the Foundations of Math-
   ematics. Dordrecht: Van Nostrand.
[KraAre.15] Krause, D. and Arenhart, J.R.B. 2015, Individuality, quantum physics,
   and a metaphysics of non- individuals: the role of the formal. In A. Guay and
   T. Pradeu (eds.) Individuals Across the Sciences. Oxford: Oxford Un. Press,
   pp. 61–70.
[KraAreMor.11] Krause, D., Arenhart, J.R.B. and Moraes, F.T.F. 2011, Axiomati-
   zation and models of scientific theories. Foundations of Science, 16: 363–82.
[KraBue.07] Krause, D. and Bueno, O. 2007. Scientific theories, models, and the
   semantic approach. Principia 11 (2): 187–201
[Kun.09] Kunen, K. 2009, The Foundations of Mathematics, London: College Pu.
[Lad.57] LadriÈre, J. 1957, Le Limitations Internes des Formalismes. Louvain: Nau-
   welaerts; Paris: Gauthier-Villars.
[Lak.76] Lakatos, I. 1976, Proofs and Refutations: The Logic of Mathematical Dis-
   covery. Cambridge: Cambridge Un. Press.
[Lan.66] Landau, E. 1966, Foundations of Analysis. New York: Chelsea Pu. Co.
[Lei.95] Leibniz. G. W. 1995, Philosophical Writings. London and Rutland: Everyman.
[Low.14]Low, Z. I. 2014, Universes for category theory. http://arxiv.org/pdf/
   1304.5227.pdf. Access date: 10/08/2015.
[Lut.12] Lutz, S. 2012, On a Straw Man in the Philosophy of Science: a Defense of
   the Received View. HOPOS: The Journal of the International Society for the
   History of Philosophy of Science 2 (1): 77–120.
[Lut.15] Lutz, S. 2015, What Was the Syntax-Semantics Debate in the Philosophy of
   Science About? Philosophy and Phenomenological research, doi: 10.1111/
   phpr.12221.
[Lui.97] Lui, S. H. 1997, An interview with Vladimir Arnol’d. Notices of the AMS
   44 (4): 432–8 (April).
[Mac.63] Mackey, G. W. 1963, Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics.
   Reading, MA: Benjamin, Advanced Book Program.
[Mac.98] Mac Lane, S. 1998, Categories for the Working Mathematician (Graduate
   Texts in Mathematics). New York: Springer.
[Mad.05] de la Madrid, R. 2005, The role of the rigged space in quantum mechan-
   ics. In arXiv:quant-ph/0502053
                                                                Bibliography      131
[MagKra.01] MagalhÃes J. C. and Krause D. 2001, Suppes predicate for genetics
   and natural selection, J Theor Biol. 21, 209 (2): 141–53.
[Mai.73] Maitland Wright, J. D. 1973, All operators on a Hilbert space are
   bounded, Bulletin of the Americal Mathematical Society 79 (6): 1247–50.
[Man.10] Manin, Yu. I. 2010, A Course in Mathematical Logic for Mathematicians,
   2nd. ed. New York: Springer
[Mar.93] Marchisotto, E. 1993, Mario Pieri and his contributions to geometry and
   foundations of mathematics, Historia Mathematica 20: 285–303.
[McSS.53] McKinsey, J.C.C., Sugar, A. C., Suppes, P. 1953, Axiomatic foundations
   of classical particle mechanics. Journal of Rational Mechanics and Analysis,
   Vol.2, No.2 (April): 253–72.
[Mar.07] Marquis, J. -P. 2007, Category theory, Stanford Enc. Philosophy, http://
   plato.stanford.edu/entries/category-theory. Access date: 01/08/2015.
[Men.97] Mendelson, E. 1997, Introduction to Mathematical Logic. Cornwall:
   Chapman & Hall.
[Moo.82] Moore, G. H. 1982, Zermelo’s Axiom of Choice: Its Origins, Develop-
   ments, and Influence. New York, Heidelberg and Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
[Mul.11] Muller, F. A. 2011, Reflections on the revolution at Stanford. Synthese,
   183 (1): 87–114.
[MulSau.08] Muller, F. A. and Saunders, S. W. 2008, Discerning fermions, British
   Journal for the Philosophy of Science 59: 499–548.
[MulSee.09] Muller F. A., Seevinck M. P. 2009. Discerning elementary particles.
   Philosophy of Science 76, 179–200.
[Nac.07] Nachotomy, O. 2007, Possibility, Agency, and Individuality in Leibniz’s
   Metaphysics. New York: Springer.
[Pen.89] Penrose, R. 1989, The emperor’s new mind. Oxford: Oxford Un. Press.
[Pen.05] Penrose, R. 2005, The Road to Reality: A Complete Guide to the Laws of
   the Universe. New York: Alfred A. Knoff.
[Pop.72] Popper, K. R. 1972, Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary Approach.
   Oxford: Clarendon Press.
[Prz.69] Przelecki, M. 1969, The Logic of Empirical Theories. London: Routledge
   & Kegan Paul (Monographs in Modern Logic Series).
[Pug.87] Pugorelov, A. 1987, Geometry. Moscow: Mir.
[Red.87] Redhead, M. 1987, Incompleteness, Nonlocality and Realism: A Prole-
   gomenon to the Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
[RubRub.70] Rubin, H and Rubin, J. E. 1970, Equivalents of the Axiom of Choice.
   Amsterdam and London: North-Holland, 2nd. printing.
[Sau.98] Sauer, T. 1998, The relativity of discovery: Hilbert’s first note on the foun-
   dations of physics. In arXiv:physics/9811050v1
[Sch.95] Schrödinger, E. 1995, The Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics: Dublin
   Seminars(1949–1955) and Other Unpublished Essays. Woodbridge: Ox Bow
   Press.
[Sha.91] Shapiro, S., 1991, Foundations without Foundationalism, a Case for
   Second-Order Logic. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
[Sho.67] Shoenfield, J. R. 1967, Mathematical Logic. Reading: Addison Wesley.
   (reprinted by the Association of Symbolic Logic, 2000).
[Sho.77] Shoenfield, J. R. 1977, Axioms of set theory. In J. Barwise (ed.) 1977.
   Handbook of Mathematical Logic. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 321–44.
[Sim.87] Simons. P. 1987, Parts: A Study in Ontology. Oxford: Oxford University
   Press.
[Sko.22] Skolem, T. 1922. Some remarks on axiomatized set theory. Reproduced in
   J. van Heijenoort (ed.) 1967. From Frege to Gödel. Cambridge: Harvard Univer-
   sity Press: 290–301.
132 Bibliography
[Smu.91] Smullyan, R. 1991, Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorems. Oxford: Oxford
   Univ. Press.
[Steg.79] StegmÜller, W. 1979, The Structuralist View of Theories. A Possible
   Analogue of Bourbaki Programme in Physical Sciences. Berlin and Heidelberg:
   Springer-Verlag.
[Sup.77] Suppe, F. (ed.) 1977, The Structure of Scientific Theories. Urbana: Chicago
   Un. Press.
[Sup.00] Suppe, F., 2000, Understanding scientific theories: an assesment of devel-
   opments, 1969–1998. Philosophy of science 67, Supplement, pp. S102-S115.
[Sups.57] Suppes, P. 1957, Introduction to Logic. Princeton: Van Nostrand.
[Sups.60] Suppes, P. 1960, A Comparison of the Meaning and Uses of Models in
   Mathematics and the Natural Sciences, Synthese 12: 287–301.
[Sups.62] Suppes, P. 1962, Models of Data. In E. Nagel, P. Suppes, and A. Tarski
   (eds.), Logic, Methodology, and Philosophy of Science: Proceedings of the
   1960 International Congress. Stanford: Stanford Un. Press, pp. 252–61.
[Sups.67] Suppes, P. 1967, What is a scientific theory? In Morgenbesser, S. (ed.),
   Philosophy of Science Today New York: Basic Books, pp. 55–67.
[Sups.77] Suppes, P. 1977, The structure of theories and the analysis of data. In:
   Suppe, F. (ed.), The Structure of Scientific Theories. 2nd. ed. Urbana and
   Chicago: Un. of Illinois, pp. 266–307.
[Sups.83] Suppes, P. 1983, Heuristics and the axiomatic method. In Groner, I.,
   Groner, M. and Bischof, W. F. (eds.), Methods of Heuristics. Hillsdale, N. J.:
   Erlbaum, pp. 79–88.
[Sups.88] Suppes, P. 1988, ‘La estructura de las teorias y el analysis de datos’, in
   Suppes, P., Estudios de Filosofı́a y Medotologı́ a de la Ciencia. Madrid:
   Alianza, pp. 125–45.
[Sups.02] Suppes, P. 2002, Representation and Invariance of Scientific Structures.
   Stanford: CLI Pu.
[Sups.11] Suppes, P. 2011, Future developments of scientific structures closer to
   experiment: Response to F. A. Muller. Synthese 183 (1): 115–23.
[SylCos.87] Sylvan, R. and da Costa, N.C.A. 1987, Cause as an implication, Studia
   Logica 47 (4), 413–28.
[Sza.64] Szabó, Á. 1964, The transformation of mathematics into deductive science
   and the beginnings of its foundation on definitions and axioms. Scripta Mathe-
   matica 27 (1): 27–49.
[Sza.65] Szabó, Á. 1965, Greek dialectic and Euclid’s axiomatics. In: Lakatos, I.
   (ed.), Problems in the Philosophy of Mathematics Proceedings of the Interna-
   tional Colloquium in the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 1. London: North-
   Holland: 1–26.
[Sza.78] Szabó, Á. 1978, The Beginnings of Greek Mathematics. Dordrecht:
   D. Reidel (Synthese Historical Library, Vol.17).
[Tar.53] Tarski, A. 1953, Undecidable Theories. Amsterdam: North Holland.
[TarGiv.87] Tarski, A. and Givant, S. 1987, A Formalization of Set Theory without
   Variables. Providence: American Mathematical Society.
[Teg.07] Tegmark, M. 2007, Shut up and calculate, arXiv:0709.4024v1
[Tor.81] Toraldo di Francia, G. 1981, The Investigation of the Physical World,
   Cambridge: Cambridge Un. Press.
[Tor.86] Toraldo di Francia, G. 1986, Le cose e i loro nomi. Bari: Laterza.
[True.84] Truesdell, C. 1984, An Idiot’s Fugitive Essay on Science: Methods, Crit-
   icism, Training, Circumstances. New York: Springer-Verlag.
[vanF.80] van Fraassen, B. 1980, The Scientific Image. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
                                                             Bibliography     133
[vanF.84] van Fraassen, B. 1984. The problem of indistinguishable particles. Re-
   printed in E. Castellani (ed.) 1998. Interpreting bodies: classical and quantum
   objects in modern physics, Princeton, NY: Princeton University Press, pp. 73–92.
[vanF.89] van Fraassen, B. 1989, Laws and Symmetry. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
[vanF.91] van Fraassen, B. 1991, Quantum Mechanics: An Empiricist View.
   Oxford: Clarendon Press.
[vanF.08] van Fraassen, B. 2008, Scientific Representation. Oxford: Oxford Un.
   Press.
[vanH.67] van Heijenoort, J. 1967, From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Math-
   ematical Logic, 1879–1931. Cambridge: Harvard Un. Press.
[Wei.03] Weingartner, P. (ed.) 2003, Alternative Logics: Do Sciences Need Them?.
   Berlin and Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.
[WhiRus.10] Whitehead, A. N., and Russell, B. 1910, Principia Mathematica,
   Vol. 1. Cambridge: Merchanf Books.
[Will.70] Williams, M. B. 1970, Deducing the consequences of evolution: a mathe-
   matical model. J. Theoret. Biol. 29: 343–85.
[Wor.07] Worral, J 2007, “Miracles and Models: Why Reports on the Death of
   Structural Realism May be Exaggerated”, in O’Hare, A. (ed.) Philosophy of
   Science (Royal Institute of Pilosophy 61), Cambridge: Cambridge University
   Press pp. 125–54.
[Yan.02] Yandell, B. 2002, The Honors Class: Hilbert’s Problems and Their Solvers.
   Natick, MA: A.K.Peters.
[Zah.04] Zahar, E. 2004, Ramseyfication and Structural Realism, Theoria 49,
   pp. 5–30.
[Zer.67] Zermelo, E. 1967/2000, Investigations in the foundations of set theory. In
   van Heijenoort (ed.), FromFrege to Gödel: a Source Book in Mathematical
   Logic, 1879–1931. Cambridge: Harvard Un. Press.
This page intentionally left blank
Index




KDn, 82                              attribution of numbers to things, 15
Rι, 82                               auxiliary constant, 93
T, 80                                Axiom of Choice, 64, 78, 91, 119
Lo ðrngðRi ÞÞ, 89                      of choice, denumerable
Loo k ðRÞ, 86                                version, 78
Loo o ðRÞ, 86                          independence of, 61
Loo o ðrngðRi ÞÞ, 89                   of choice, 91
Loo 1o ðRÞ, 86, 87                        in quantum mechanics, 104
L2 , 42, 46                               in ZFU, 58
Lnoo , 113                                independence of, 46
L1oo , 86                              of choice, formulation, 29, 51
E  S, 88                              of elementary sets, 28
OrdðtÞ, 81                             of extensionality, 28, 48
rngðRi Þ, 89                           of infinity, 29
ε({Dn}), 82                            of regularity, or foundation, 50
{x : α(x)}, 47                         of separation, 28
s-algebra, 84                          of the infinity, 50
                                       of the power set, 28, 61
abbreviations                          of union, 29
  in the metalanguage of ZF(C), 46     of unordered pair, 48
absolute concepts, 120                 pair, 23
algebras                                  model of, 54
  free, 109                            power set, 23
  homomorphism between, 84             replacement axioms
  isomorphism between, 85                 and the sciences, 78
AM, see axiomatic method               separation, 27
  method                               separation schema, 49
analyticity, 6                         substitution, 23
Aristotle, 22, 23, 64, 72              substitution schema, 61
Arnol’d, V., 68                        union, 49
atoms                                  well-order, 91
  as synonymous of Urelemente, 57    axiom of comprehension for
  as Urelemente, 27                          classes, 47
136 Index
axiomatic method, xiii, xiv, 62, 63, 65,      diagonal argument, 59
        67–68, 70–71, 72, 76               cardinal
  as an autopilot, 44                         strong inaccessible, 52
  in biology, 75                           Carnap, R., xi, 2, 4, 6–10, 19, 42, 128
  origins, v, 21                           category theory, 42, 74, 79
axiomatic theories, 63                     Cauchy sequences, 59
axiomatization, 76                         Cauchy, A.L.
  abstract, xiv, 25, 29                       sequences, 33
  and heuristics, 40                       Chuaqui, R., xiv, xv, 76, 79, 80, 83,
  as the organization of a field, 25               94, 95, 99, 103, 112, 118
  concrete, 25                                on the semantic approach, 117
  external, 76, 77                         Church thesis, 71
  extreinsic, 99                           Church, A., 44, 71
  finitely axiomatizable, 110              class, 47
  formal, xiv, 25, 34                      class term, 47
  inside set theory, 100                   classical particle mechanics, xiv, xv, 65
  internal, 76                                Suppes predicate for, 96
  intrinsic, 99                            classical propositional logic, 85
  intuitive, 25                            Coelho, A.M.N., 103, 120
  non-relativistic quantum mechanics,      Cohen, P
        104                                   independence of the Axiom of
  of classical particle mechanics, 78              Choice, 46
  pure formal, 25                          Cohen, P., 40, 120
  role of set theory, 77                   collapse postulate, 107
  styles of, 17                            condition, 47
  why?, 21                                 consistency
axiomatization and heuristics, 63             absolute, 53
axioms                                        of ZF(C), 52
  scheme of, 28                               relative, 53
                                              semantic, 54
Béziau, J.-Y., 42                            syntactical, 53
Balzer, W., 66                             Contessa, G., 128
believing a theory, 18                     continuum hypothesis, 91, 120
Bohr, N., 121                              continuum mechanics, 25, 65
Bolyai-Lobachewski geometry, 23            convergence, 33
Borel sets, 105, 122                       correspondence rules, 4–6, 18, 77
Bourbaki, N., xi, 62, 68, 84, 93, 101,     CPM, see classical particle mechanics
        102                                criterion of eliminability, 92
   echelon construction schema, 82         criterion of non-criativity, 92
   species of structures, xiii, 102        cut rule
   The Architecture of Mathematics, 30        formal proof, 39
Bueno, O., 118                                informal proof, 38

Cantor, G., 59                             da Costa, N.C.A., xiii, xiv, xv, 17, 43,
  definition of set, 27, 108                     44, 60, 76, 79, 80, 82, 83, 88,
                                                                 Index    137
        94, 95, 99–110, 102–103, 112,      formulation, 34
        118                             force
  on the semantic approach, 117            electromagnetic, 69
  principle of constructivity, 42          gravitation, 69
Darwin, C., 29, 71, 72                     strong, 69
Davies, P., 93                             weak, 69
DC                                      formal language, 10
  the axiom of dependent choices, 119   formalization
Dedekind cuts, 59                          advantages of, 117
Dedekind, R., 89                        formulas
deduction, 78                              of a first-order language, 35
definability, xv, 89                       of the language of ZF(C), 46
definable in wide sense, 118            Fraenkel, A.A., 28
definit property, 27                       the elimination of the Urelemente,
definite property, 28                           56
derived concepts, 22                    free algebra, 85
Descartes, 43                           Frege, G.
distance, 33                               polemic with Hilbert, 23
dynamic postulate, 107                  French, S., 17, 20, 73, 113, 116

echelon construction schema, 82         Gödel, K.
electroweak theory, 69                    proper classes, 48
elementary class of structures, 110       second incompleteness theorem, 52,
elementary equivalence, 103                     54, 55
empirical adequacy, 117                 Galilei, G., 71
empiricists dogma of reduction, 6       gauge theories, 69
emptyset, 28                            general relativity, 70
epistemic structural realism, 77        Gentzen, G., 38
Euclid, 22, 23, 68                      Giere, R., xii
Euclid’s parallel postulate, 51         Grandjot, C., 38
Euclidean geometry, 23, 25, 26          Gross, D., 70
Euclidean space, 97                     Grothendieck, A.
Eudoxus, 40                               universes, 74
explicandum, 8                          group theory, 30, 69, 79, 84
explicatum, 8                             basic structure, 30
extension by definitions, 79              different presentations, 14
extraordinary sets, 51                    language of, 96
                                          structure for, 96
Feferman, S., 110                         Suppes predicate for, 96
Feyerabend, P., 5                       Gödel, K., 40, 69, 74, 120
finitistic reasoning, 44                  consistence of the Axiom of Choice,
firs-order languages, 7                         46
first-order languages, 7                  incompleteness theorems, 34
first-order logic, 64, 72                 second incompleteness theorem, 52,
   axioms, 36                                   54
138 Index
Halvorson, H., 8, 9, 14–16, 18, 70,   isomorphism, 85
       129                               definition of, 16
Hamel, G., 66                         isomorphisms, 15
Hamiltonian mechanics, 14                between structures, 15
Hanson, N.R., 5                          of theories, 16
Heisenberg, W., 14, 93
Helium atom, 93, 94                   Jafee, A., 70
Hempel, C.G., 2, 4, 70, 71
Hermitan operator, 123, 125           Kepler, J., 71
Hermitean operators, 119              knowledge
heuristic axiomatization, 63            conceptual, xi
hidden variables, 109                   structural, xi
higher-order concepts, 7              Kolmogorov, A.N., 73
higher-order languages, 10, 60        Kolmogorov, N., 64
Hilbert, D., 23, 45, 63, 68           Kuhn, T., 5
  23 Problems of Mathematics, 24      Kunen, K., 45
  on axiomatization, 25
  polemic with Frege, 24              Löwenheim-Skolem
  rigged Hilbert spaces, 108            downward, 59
  spaces,, 31, 32, 105, 119             upwards, 59
  spaces (definition), 33               downwards, 59
  the 6th Problem, 24                 Lacan, J., xi
                                      Ladrière, J., 25
inaccessible cardinal, 55, 87         Lagrangean mechanics, 14
inaccessible cardinals, 52, 74, 109   Lakatos, I., 62, 63, 68, 71
individual                            language
  the notion of, xii                    independence of, 11, 12
inference                             language independence, 18
  abductive, 60                       language independent, 16
  inductive, 60                       languages, 83
informal mathematics, 63                as algebras, 85
inner product, 32                       constructed in ZFC, 86
intended model of ZF(C), 52             denumerable, 46
interpretation, 10                      finitary, 113
interpretation function, 12             first-order, 7, 11, 113
intuition, 43                           for a structure, 86
  intelectual, 44                       higher-order, 87
  intuitive arithmetics, 44             infinitary, 86, 87, 118
  left behind, 23                       of a structure, 88, 117
  not enough, 43                        of group theory, 96
  of entities, 44                       of order ω, 87
  of the number two, 45                 of order n, 113
intuitionistic arithmetics, 42          of order n, 1  n < ω, 87
intuitionistic mathematics, 44          of quantum mechanics, 108
intuitive pragmatic nucleus, 44         order, 112
                                                                        Index      139
   order of, 87                                of a formal theory, 53
   order-ω, 113                                of a theory, 99
   second-order, 113                           qualitative, 15
Leśniewicz’s conditions, 92                   the meanings of the word, 112
least upper bound, 7                           two notions of, 13
Lebesgue, H.                                  model revolution, 3
   measure in the sense of, 125               model theory, 1, 10, 11, 113
Lesniewicz, S., 61                            modeling the phenomena, 15
limit ordeinal, 61                            models, 103
linear spaces, see vector spaces               as models of something, 12
linguistic formulation, 8                      as set-theoretical structures, 13
logic                                          class of, 76
   complimentary, 34                           classes of, 14
   deduction symbol, 36                        first-order, 11
   first-order, 34                             inside and outside of, 123
   formal theorem, 37                          numerical, 15
   heterodox, 34                               of scientific theories, 112
   in abstract axiomatics, 31                  of theories, 15
   must be developed twice, 45                 of ZF(C), 54
   thesis of, 37                               theories as classes of, 13
logical consequence, 115                      modern logic, 23
logical empiricism, 1, 19                     modern mathematics
logical positivists, 70                        the rise of, 30
Logical Empiricist program, 1                 morphisms, 15
Lutz, S., 7, 8, 9, 10, 17, 18, 19, 112, 130   Muller, F.A., 4, 14, 15, 110
                                              multisets, 27
Mackey, G., 64, 73
Manin, Yu.I., 108                             NBG set theory, 48, 78, 125
mathematics                                   new symbols
 intuitionistic, 68                             introduction of, 92
 non-cantorian, 69                            Newton, I., 71
 paraconsistent, 68                             three laws, 40
McKinsey, J.C.C., 65                          Noll, W., 67
 answer to Truesdell, 67                      nominal definitions, 74
membership relation, 27                       non-euclidean geometries, 64
mereology, 58                                 non-individuals, xii
metalanguage, 115                             non-standard models, 64
metamathematics, 119                          norm
metametatheory, 45                              induced by the inner product, 33
metatheory, 45
metavariables, 46                             objects
method of the auxiliary constant, 93            definability, xv, 90
Mirimanov, D., 51                             objectuation, 110
model                                         order of a language, 87
 intended, 26                                 order of a relation, 81
140 Index
ordinal                                    groups in, 30
  imit, 54                                 postulates of, 106
                                           symmetry conditions, 124
paraconsistent set theory, 47              wave function, 93
partial truth, 89                        quantum semantics, xii
Pauli, W.                                quasi-set theory, 109, 124
  exclusion principle, 109               quasi-sets, xii, 41
Peano, G,                                quasi-truth, 123
  postulates, 115
Peano, G., 64                            Ramsey, F. P., 77
  arithmetics, 26, 38                    real numbers, 73, 77
  axioms, 26, 38                            field of, 7
  axioms in ZFC, 101                        not denumerable, 91
  non-standard models, 34                Received View, 1–10, 13–15, 19, 65,
Peirce, C.S., 43                                  76–78, 99, 100
Pieri, M., 23, 25                           as an ideal, 19
Popper, K.R., 63                            characterization, 4
postulates                                  failure of, 7
  independence of, 23                       inadequacies of, 18
  of the theory of human paternity, 26   Redhead, M., 106
postulates and axioms, 22                reduction to the absurd, 21
postulates of a theory, 78               relations
  logical, 78                               definability, 90
  mathematical, 78                          order of, 81
  specific, 78                              partial, 89
precisification, 8, 9                    relative concepts, 120
primitive concepts, 22                   relativization of a formula, 61
primitive notions, 22                    restrict quantifiers, 57
principle of constructivity, 42          restriction of an operation, 32
probability theory, 77                   Rodrigues, A.A.M., 118
proof theory, 40                         Rule C, 93
proofs and refutations, 62, 63           Russell’s class, 47
proper classes, 48, 116                  Russell, B., 40
proper subset, 49                           Russell’s set, 47

QCD, quantum chromodynamics, 69          Saunders, S., 110
QED, quantum electrodynamics, 69         scales
quantu mechanics                            definition of, 81
  Copenhague interpretation, 93          schema of axioms, 61
quantum field theory, 70                 Schrödinger, E., 14
quantum gravity, 70                      scientific activity, xi
quantum mechanics, 14, 30, 31, 32,       scientific practice, 3, 7
       34, 119, 120                      scientific theories, 1, 18, 60, 76, 112
  and Skolem paradox, 121                   characterization of, 117
  as an indeterministic theory, 121      Seevinck, M.P., 110
                                                                     Index    141
semantic approach, xiii, 1, 3, 8, 10,        Galois group, 118
         13, 14, 18–20, 118                  hierarchy of, 15
   advantages of, 12                         higher-order, 113
   and models, 11                            order, 112
   characteristics, 11                       order–1, 79
sentence, 47                                 order-1, 112, 113
set                                          rigid, 124
   not a relative notion, 41                 set theoretical, 79
set theory                                   similarity type
   and mathematical concepts, 78                signature, 84
   as a higher-order theory, 78              to organize knowledge, xiv, 43
   in axiomatization, 77                     truth in, xv, 88
   informal, xii                             vector spaces, 83
   models of, 52, 79                       subset, 27, 28, 49
   paraconsistent, 47                      subspace, 32
   paradoxes, 29                           subspaces
   the need of, xii                          closed, 34
   the well-founded model, 80              Sugar, A.C., 65
set-theoretical predicate, 114             Suppe, F., 1, 2, 4, 7–9, 70
set-theoretical structures, 11             Suppes predicate
sets                                         for non-relativistic quantum
   in Zermelo’s set theory, 27                     mechanics, 104
   relative to a theory, 47                Suppes, P., xi, xii, xiv, xv, 3, 10, 13,
Shapiro, S., 89                                    15, 17, 19, 39, 63–65, 69, 72,
Sierpinski, W., 120                                76–77, 79, 83, 94, 95, 96, 98–
simple theory of types, 80                         103, 104, 112
Skolem, T., 27, 56, 120, 123                 set-theoretical predicate, 59
   ;paradox of, 59                           and his approach, 99
Solovay, R., 119                             and the need of models of another
states and events, 123                             kind, 116
Stegmüller, W., 66                          and the origins of the axiomatic
structural knowledge, 44                           method, 40
structures                                   and the semantic approach,
   automorphims, 124                               114
   automorphisms of, 118                     mathematics and not
   classical particle mechanics, 83                metamathematics, 115
   definition of, 82                         model revolution, 3
   equivalence                               on psychology, 24
      necessary and sufficient condition     predicate, 13, 13, 17, 83
         for, 118                            proofs inside set theory, 115
   equivalence of, 118                       set-theoretical predicate, 59
   fields, 84                                the role of axioms, 116
   first-order, 11                           theory of human paternity, 26, 37
   for empirical sciences, 79                theory of paternity, 26
   for the language of ZF(C), xiv, 52      syntactic approach, 6, 18, 20, 118
142 Index
syntactical approach, xiii, 1, 3, 9          as a class of models, xiii
  characteristics, 10                             axiomatization, 7, 76
syntactical approaches, 3, 6, 8,             categorical, 55
        14, 20                               characterization of, xiii, 8
syntax-semantic debate, xiii, 1, 11          extrinsic characterization, 99
Szabó, A., 40                               inconsistent, xii individuation
  the origins of the axiomatic                    of, 4
        method, 21                           intrinsic characterization, 99
                                             linguistic formulation, xiii logical
Tarski, A., xiv, xv, 1, 17, 40, 74, 88,           postulates, 78
        89, 90, 103, 113                     mathematical postulates, 78
   and model theory, 10                      specific postulates, 78
   as the precursor of the semantic          three levels of postulates, 78
        view, 14                          theory equivalence, 118
   model in the sense of, 11              theory of groups, 12
   models in the sense of, 12, 13,        topological space, 13, 113
        113, 114                          Toraldo di Francia, G., 93
   on semantics, 117                      transfinite cardinals, 44
   satisfaction and truth, 115            transfinite recursion, 54
   undefinability of truth, 34            transitive class, 54
terms                                     Truesdell, C., 65, 66, 67
   observational, 4, 78                   Turing, A., 71
   of a first-order language, 35          type theory, 7, 113
   of the language of ZF(C), 46           types
   theoretical, 4, 5, 78                     definition of, 80
the language of ZFU, 56                      order of, 81
theorems, 22
theoretical equivalence, 10, 14           ultraproducts, 103
theoretical postulates, 4                 unbounded operators, 119
theoretical terms, 19                     unheuristic axiomatization, 63
theoretical vocabulary, 4                 unitary set, 28
theories, 18                              universal algebra, 84
   as classes of models, 18               universes, 52, 74, 79
   axiomatization, 76                     ur-elements, see Urelemente
   axiomatization of, 20                  Urelemente, 46, 56, 78, 115, 120
   elementary equivalent, 16                and atoms in set theory, 27
   equivalence of, 118                      elimination of, 56
   extrinsic approach, 17
   intrinsic approach, 17                 validity, 88
   representation of, 20                  van Fraassen, B., xii, 3, 7–8, 12, 15,
theory                                            18, 19, 121, 122
   as a class of models, xiii, 11           dynamical vs. experimental, 121
   and experience, 5, 6                     empirical adequacy, 117
   and experiment, 19                       modal interpretation, 120
   and reality, 15                          state and value attributions, 122
                                                             Index    143
vector spaces                           natural numbers, 29
  definition, 31                        on the limitation of size, 49
  models of, 114                        set theory, 64
Vienna Circle, 1, 2, 4, 5               Zermelo sets, 41
vocabulary                            Zermelo—Fraenkel set theory, see ZF,
  theoretical and observational, 77          see ZF, see ZF
von Neumann universe, 54              Zermelo—Fraenkel set theory with the
von Neumann, J., 122                         Axiom of Choice, see ZFC
                                      ZF, 42
wave function collapse of, 94           what it is, 45
wave functions, 108                   ZF(C), see ZF, ZFC, 42, 44, 45, 55
well-founded model of ZF(C), 54         formulation as a formal theory, 45
Weyl, H., 30                            logical postulates, 48
Whitehead, A.N., 40                     models of, 53
Williams, M., 71                        standard model, 59
Woodger, J., 24, 75                     the language of, 46
Worrall, J., 77                         the postulates of, 48
                                        the theories, 42
Zp, 78                                ZFC, 45, 78, 100
Zp 55                                   as a second-order theory, 60
Zahar, E., 77, 78                       being used, 79
Zeno of Elea, 22                        denumerable model, 59
Zermelo’s set theory, 55                what it is, 45
Zermelo, E., 27, 42                   ZFU, 56
  domain of objects, 27                 equiconsistent with ZF(C), 58
